
--- Page 1 ---
A New Paradigm in Blockchain-based Financial
Aid Distribution
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh1, Md. Tabassinur Rahman2, and Nafees Mansoor3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Liberal Arts Bangladesh, Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh
raisul.hasan.cse@ulab.edu.bd1, tabassenur.rahman.cse@ulab.edu.bd2,
nafees@ieee.org3
Abstract. Blockchain technology has emerged as a game-changer in a
variety of industries, providing robust solutions that can supplant con-
ventional procedures. The unique potential of this technology originates
from its decentralized ledger systems, which enable enhanced security,
transparency, and the validation of transactions without the need for in-
termediaries. Notably, the financial sector is making substantial progress
toward implementing blockchain solutions for a variety of operations, in-
cluding remittances, lending, and investments. The healthcare industry is
simultaneously incorporating this technology into systems for managing
medical records, tracing supply chains, and data management. Similarly,
the capacity of blockchain to enhance transparency, traceability, and ac-
countability is widely acknowledged in supply chain management, from
the procurement of basic materials to the delivery of finished goods.
Diverse industries, including real estate, energy, and government, are
actively investigating the potential of blockchain to improve efficiency,
security, and transparency. Notably, Hyperledger Besu, an open-source
blockchain platform, is used to implement smart contracts that auto-
mate processes and reduce manual intervention along distribution path-
ways. This exhaustive review examines the transformative potential of
blockchain technology across a variety of industries, discussing the ob-
stacles encountered and providing key insights into future research and
development directions. This paper seeks to serve as a pivotal resource
for academics, industry stakeholders, and policymakers by synthesizing
existing scholarly literature and shedding light on significant findings.
Keywords: Blockchain · Smart Contracts · FinTech · Process Automa-
tion · Decentralized Ledger
1
Introduction
Blockchain, a revolutionary technology conceived by Satoshi Nakamoto, under-
pins Bitcoin and has become a driving force in the financial technology (Fin-
tech) sector [1]. The data structure, peer-to-peer network, and consensus mech-
anisms [2,3] of this decentralized platform provide enhanced security, process
simplification, and trust. Public, private, and consortium blockchains each have
arXiv:2311.08494v1  [cs.SE]  14 Nov 2023

--- Page 2 ---
2
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
distinct advantages and disadvantages [4]. The burgeoning trend of blockchain
implementation in the financial sector is revolutionizing fundamental processes.
It improves cross-border transactions, trading, contract automation, auditabil-
ity, and fraud detection, and has substantial implications for data security [5].
Consortium blockchains in particular establish a balance between privacy and
transparency, making them ideal for financial applications [5]. This proposed
system, a consortium blockchain-based decentralized application (DApp), exem-
plifies this development. It leverages smart contracts and robust digital identity
verification[6] to facilitate efficient and transparent pension fund transfers in
an effort to transform pension systems. This decentralized application reduces
corruption risks and administrative costs while enhancing real-time auditability
and accountability.
This document goes into detail on the significant influence blockchain tech-
nology has had on the banking industry. The distribution of funds in the human-
itarian sector is covered in Section 2, while Section 3 goes into great length on
the guiding principles of the suggested system. The system’s design and execu-
tion are covered in Sections 4 and 5, respectively, while the blockchain revolution
and its potential outcomes are covered in Section 4.
2
Related Works
Blockchain technology, specifically the consortium blockchain variant, is driving
significant change across multiple industries, with the financial sector at the van-
guard due to increased efficiency, cost savings, and enhanced security [7]. The
technology redefines financial transactions by eliminating the need for interme-
diaries and fostering an auditable system as a result of its inherent immutability
and transparency [7]. Financial institutions recognize the value of consortium
blockchains, which strike a balance between privacy and transparency and are
administered by a predetermined group of nodes [5]. This innovative approach
is applicable not only to the financial sector, but also to a broader range of use
cases, such as the development of intelligent cross-border transaction systems
[5] and enhanced data privacy and security in health information systems [8].
Despite obstacles such as regulatory constraints, interoperability concerns, and
user adoption issues, the potential benefits of consortium blockchain technology
warrant additional investigation [9].
Within the context of stock exchange platforms, the transformative poten-
tial of consortium blockchain is especially notable. Al-Shaibani et al. Scalabil-
ity and interoperability with existing stock exchanges are potential stumbling
blocks for the technology. Consequently, future research should investigate in-
novative industry applications in these domains [1]. For secure data sharing in
the healthcare industry, consortium blockchain systems such as HonestChain are
proving effective [8]. The system combines the benefits of both public and private
blockchains, enhancing security, privacy, and regulatory compliance. Similarly,
consortium blockchain can considerably improve the sharing and storage of data
in vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) [10]. Nevertheless, the ephemeral char-

--- Page 3 ---
A New Paradigm in Blockchain-based Financial Aid Distribution
3
acter of VANETs [11] and their limited computational resources [12], present ob-
stacles to the implementation of consortium blockchain. The proposed solutions
include lightweight consensus algorithms [13], mechanisms that protect privacy,
and efficient data storage techniques [10]. In addition, consortium blockchain
is making its imprint on intelligent transportation systems by providing secure
data interchange and bespoke services [3]. It promises superior performance over
traditional centralized systems in intelligent transportation [1], mobile malware
detection, and smart city governance [7], resulting in enhanced decision-making
and citizen engagement. The implications of consortium blockchain extend to
smart home systems, where homomorphic encryption can provide privacy pro-
tection [14]. In the healthcare industry, which is beset by data security and access
concerns, consortium blockchain provides a system that satisfies the diverse data
access requirements of various stakeholders, thereby enhancing the efficiency and
security of medical data management [15].
Moreover, consortium blockchain technology bears promise for high-risk in-
dustries, such as coal extraction [16], where it can facilitate data sharing, col-
laboration, and accountability among stakeholders, thereby enhancing safety.
Consortium blockchain can improve data accountability and provenance moni-
toring [17], which are crucial in sectors such as healthcare, finance, and gover-
nance. In the context of smart grids, consortium blockchain can resolve prob-
lems associated with a lack of trust and transparency [17]. Moreover, consortium
blockchain technology proposes optimistic solutions for pension systems, facili-
tating efficiency, transparency, and secure pension access and administration [18].
Other possible applications include bolstering privacy protection in Vehicle-to-
Grid (V2G) networks [19], securing smart contracts, and protecting peer-to-peer
file storage and sharing [20]. In conclusion, the vast potential of consortium
blockchain technology is evident across numerous industries. It offers solutions
to problems that conventional centralized systems struggle to address, indicating
optimistic future developments and an imminent digital transformation.
3
Proposed System
This section describes the proposed platform, which aims to improve the trans-
parency and efficacy of humanitarian aid distribution. The design, which is rep-
resented by a block diagram and Unified Modeling Language (UML) models,
illustrates the system’s essential components, their interactions, and object-
oriented characteristics. These provide a clear comprehension of the structure
and functionality of the system, laying the groundwork for future development
and implementation.
3.1
System Overview
As depicted in Figure 1, the proposed system operates on a consortium blockchain
involving diverse stakeholders including a fund-distribution entity, pension bene-
ficiaries, and prospective financial service providers. Managed by the organizing

--- Page 4 ---
4
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
entity, the primary node governs smart contracts, beneficiary enrollment, and
fund distribution. Beneficiary nodes with the proper authorization can interact
with the smart contract to verify balances or obtain funds. All organization-
Fig. 1. Proposed System’s Block Diagram
initiated transactions are securely recorded on the distributed ledger, ensuring se-
curity, auditability, and traceability. Integration with financial service providers
for off-chain transactions improves the system’s efficacy and control. This blockchain-
based method guarantees a secure, transparent, and streamlined procedure for
the distribution of funds.
3.2
Technical Schematics
The orderly workflow within this system is depicted in Fig. 2’s activity dia-
gram. It begins with the ’Organization’ adding funds and managing recipients,
a crucial stage for the fairness and integrity of the system. Afterwards, recipient
bank accounts are registered, a crucial stage for ensuring accurate fund transfers
and highlighting the system’s emphasis on security. Provision of allowances to
recipients concludes the procedure, contingent on the successful completion of
preceding stages.

--- Page 5 ---
A New Paradigm in Blockchain-based Financial Aid Distribution
5
Fig. 2. Proposed System’s Activity Diagram
Fig. 3. Proposed System’s Use Case Diagram

--- Page 6 ---
6
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
The sequential sequence, in which each action leads to the next, enhances
the operational efficiency and dependability of the system. Consequently, the
activity diagram encapsulates the interdependent system operations, indicating
the system’s overall dependability.
Use case diagram for the proposed system, illustrating how key actors interact
with the system’s features. The fact that the ’Organization’ manages recipients,
adds funds, distributes allowances, and registers bank accounts is indicative of
its control over the system’s operations. The ’Recipient,’ although indirectly
interacting with the system, is a crucial actor receiving allowances from the
organization. The diagram effectively depicts the responsibilities and interactions
of each actor, highlighting the well-structured design of the system. This diagram
concisely summarizes the operation of this system, making complex processes
simple to comprehend. Figure 3’s use case diagram illustrates, in summary, a
robust and structured method for aid distribution, creating the groundwork for
an effective, transparent, and secure resource allocation process.
4
Development & Implementation of the Proposed
System
The suggested system uses the ’aNp’ smart contract for transaction control and
node interaction, which is supported by consortium blockchain technology. The
’organization’ that has the contract manages the distribution of funds, and ’re-
cipients’ are the people who can use it. The distribution of pension funds is made
secure, open, and effective thanks to the system’s integration of smart contracts
and off-chain transactions.
4.1
Smart Contract
The suggested method makes use of the Solidity-built aNp contract as a re-
liable mechanism for efficient and safe financial distribution within a consor-
tium blockchain context. The authority to administer and distribute financial
allowances is granted to an authoritative organization by this contract, which
is deployed using the constructor function [Algorithm 1]. The AddRecipient
and RemoveRecipient [Algorithm 1] methods are crucial for managing benefi-
ciary lists for the organization. The RegisterBankAccount [Algorithm 1] function
strengthens system security by ensuring secure connection of recipient addresses
to bank accounts using keccak256 encryption.
The company can distribute allowances thanks to the basic functionality of the
aNp contract, which uses stringent guidelines for recipient authorization and
fund availability checks to guarantee transactional security. The AddFunds func-
tion [Algorithm 2] in the contract also enables balance replenishment, enabling
continued operation. Financial integrity is strengthened by the SendAllowance
function [Algorithm 2], which guarantees secure fund transfers to authorized
receivers. Finally, by enabling any address to check its balance,

--- Page 7 ---
A New Paradigm in Blockchain-based Financial Aid Distribution
7
Algorithm 1: Authorization Functions
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller.
Result: Constructor(), Initialize the contract with msg.sender as the
organization, organization = msg.sender;
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _recipient as the
address of the new recipient.
Result: Add a new recipient.
if msg.sender == organization then
recipients[_recipient] = true;
end
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _recipient as the
address of the recipient to be removed.
Result: Remove a recipient.
if msg.sender == organization then
recipients[_recipient] = false;
end
Data: msg.sender: Current function caller
Data: _recipient: Recipient address, _account: Account to be registered
Result: A registered bank account for a recipient.
if msg.sender == organization AND recipients[_recipient] == true AND
bytes(_account).length > 0 then
bankAccounts[_recipient] = keccak256(abi.encodePacked(_account));
emit BankAccountRegistered (_recipient, bankAccounts[_recipient]);
end
Algorithm 2: Transaction Functions
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _amt as the amount to
be added.
Result: Add funds to the organization’s balance.
if msg.sender == organization then
balances[organization] += _amt;
emit FundsAdded(msg.value);
end
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _recipient as the
address of the recipient, _amount as the amount to be sent.
Result: Send allowance to a recipient.
if msg.sender == organization AND recipients[_recipient] == true
AND balances[organization] >= _amount then
balances[organization] -= _amount;
emit AllowanceSent(_recipient, _amount);
end
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller.
Result: Return the balance of the function caller, return
balances[msg.sender];

--- Page 8 ---
8
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
the GetBalance function [Algorithm 2] enables transparency. These charac-
teristics come together to create a safe, traceable, and transparent mechanism
for financial distribution.
4.2
Smart Contract Functionality
Written in Ethereum’s Solidity programming language, the "aNp" smart con-
tract functions as the system’s backbone. The contract establishes the address
of the organization and maintains listings of recipients, their balances, and en-
crypted bank information [14]. The contract initialization function identifies the
organization as the deploying address, thus identifying the system administrator
[18]. Important operations, including recipient administration and fund distri-
bution, are restricted to this address by the ’onlyOrganization’ modifier. ’ad-
dRecipient’,’removeRecipient’, and’sendAllowance’ functions facilitate recipient
list modifications and disbursement of funds, assuming adequate balance [15].
The ’addFunds’ function allows the organization to add funds to a contract,
whereas the ’getBalance’ function allows any participant to view their balance
[21]. The’registerBankAccount’ function securely stores recipients’ hashed bank
account information [3]. Important operations generate event logs for auditability
and transparency.
4.3
Private Decentralized Network
Hyperledger Besu is an enterprise-grade, open-source blockchain platform cre-
ated by the Hyperledger consortium. It supports both public and private Ethereum-
compatible networks and provides a flexible foundation for the development and
deployment of decentralized applications. Using Hyperledger Besu, we have ef-
fectively deployed a private consortium blockchain network in this instance.
This private network ensures that only authorized users have access to a
controlled and secure environment. Using Truffle, a comprehensive development
environment, testing framework, and asset infrastructure for Ethereum, we fa-
cilitated the efficient deployment of our smart contract during the setup process.
Significant is the successful deployment [See Fig.4] of our system on a private
Hyperledger Besu network. It provides numerous advantages, including transac-
tion secrecy, data privacy, and the ability to leverage existing Ethereum infras-
tructure, all of which are essential for business applications. It improves the
system’s overall robustness, scalability, and security, assuring a reliable platform
for secure transactions and interactions, thereby improving the system’s overall
functionality.

--- Page 9 ---
A New Paradigm in Blockchain-based Financial Aid Distribution
9
Fig. 4. Smart Contract Deployment on HyperLedger Besu Private Network
5
Conclusion and Future Works
The unique combination of transparency and privacy in consortium blockchain
technology presents significant opportunities for sector-wide transformation. De-
spite difficulties with scalability and interoperability, it is imperative to inves-
tigate its potential and establish robust regulatory structures. Future research
should focus on enhancing interoperability, scalability, and the development of
smart contracts with the potential incorporation of AI. Additionally, we must
comprehend the socioeconomic ramifications of widespread adoption and the
government’s function in drafting an accommodating legal framework. Such a
comprehensive and multifaceted research strategy would allow us to fully exploit
the potential of consortium blockchain technology.
References
1. Al-Shaibani, H., Lasla, N., & Abdallah, M. (2020). “Consortium blockchain-based
decentralized stock exchange platform” IEEE Access, 8, 123711–123725
2. Al Sunaidi, S. J., & Alhaidari, F. A. (2019). A survey of consensus algorithms for
blockchain technology. In 2019 international conference on computer and informa-
tion sciences (iccis) (pp. 1–6).
3. Wang, D., & Zhang, X. (2020). Secure data sharing and customized services
for intelligent transportation based on a consortium blockchain. IEEE Access, 8,
56045–56059.

--- Page 10 ---
10
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
4. Fan, M., & Zhang, X. (2019). Consortium blockchain based data aggregation and
regulation mechanism for smart grid. IEEE Access, 7, 35929–35940
5. Fu, Z., Dong, P., Li, S., & Ju, Y. (2021). An intelligent cross-border transaction
system based on consortium blockchain: A case study in shenzhen, china. Plos one,
16(6), E0252489.
6. Rahman, T., & Mouno, S. I., & Raatul, A. M., & Azad, A. K. A., & Mansoor,
N. (2023). Verifi-Chain: A Credentials Verifier using Blockchain and IPFS. arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2307.05797.
7. Bai, Y., Hu, Q., Seo, S.-H., Kang, K., & Lee, J. J. (2021). Public participation
consortium blockchain for smart city governance. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
9(3), 2094–2108.
8. Purohit, S., Calyam, P., Alarcon, M. L., Bhamidipati, N. R., Mosa, A., & Salah,
K.(2021). Honestchain: Consortium blockchain for protected data sharing in health
information systems. Peer-to-peer Networking and Applications, 14(5), 3012–3028.
9. Srivastav, R. K., Agrawal, D., Shrivastava, A., et al. (2020). A survey on vulnera-
bilities and performance evaluation criteria in blockchain technology.
10. Zhang, X., & Chen, X. (2019), Data security sharing and storage based on a con-
sortium blockchain in a vehicular ad-hoc network. IEEE Access, 7, 58241– 58254.
11. Akter, S., & Mansoor, N. (2020). A spectrum aware mobility pattern based routing
protocol for CR-VANETs. 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), 1–6.
12. Mansoor, N., & Hossain, M. I., & Rozario, A., & Zareei, M., & Arreola, A. R.
(2023). A Fresh Look at Routing Protocols in Unmanned Aerial Vehicular Net-
works: A Survey.IEEE Access.
13. Onee, B. A. H., & Antora, K. F., & Rajme, O. S., & Mansoor, N. (2023). De-
velopment of a Blockchain-Based On-Demand Lightweight Commodity Delivery
System. arXiv, cs.DC, 2307.08050.
14. She, W., Gu, Z.-H., Lyu, X.-K., Liu, Q., Tian, Z., & Liu, W. (2019). Homomorphic
consortium blockchain for smart home system sensitive data privacy preserving.
IEEE Access, 7, 62058–62070.
15. Xu, B., Xu, L. D., Wang, Y., & Cai, H. (2022). A distributed dynamic authorisa-
tion method for internet+ medical & healthcare data access based on consortium
blockchain. Enterprise Information Systems, 16(12), 1922757.
16. Qiang, Z., Wang, Y., Song, K., & Zhao, Z. (2021). Mine consortium blockchain: the
application research of coal mine safety production based on blockchain. Security
and Communication Networks, 2021.
17. Neisse, R., Steri, G., & Nai-Fovino, I. (2017). A blockchain-based approach for data
accountability and provenance tracking. In Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on availability, reliability and security (pp. 1–10).
18. ANDRIANOVA, A., HAUNER, P., MCDONALD, D. K., MANNING, D. A., &
ZEROUALI, M. (n.d.). Akropolis: A global blockchain pensions infrastructure.
19. Wei, G., & Ma, Y. (2021). Privacy protection strategy of vehicle-to-grid network
based on consortium blockchain and attribute-based signature. In Iop conference
series: Earth and environmental science (Vol. 661, p. 012027).
20. Peng, S., Bao, W., Liu, H., Xiao, X., Shang, J., Han, L., . . . Xu, Y. (2023).
A peer-to-peer file storage and sharing system based on consortium blockchain.
Future Generation Computer Systems, 141, 197–204.
21. Yue, K., Zhang, Y., Chen, Y., Li, Y., Zhao, L., Rong, C., & Chen, L. (2021). A sur-
vey of decentralizing applications via blockchain: The 5g and beyond perspective.
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 23(4), 2191–2217.
