
--- Page 1 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial
Distribution System
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh1, Md. Tabassinur Rahman2, and Nafees Mansoor3
Department of Computer Science & Engineering,
University of Liberal Arts Bangladesh, Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh
raisul.hasan.cse@ulab.edu.bd1, tabassenur.rahman.cse@ulab.edu.bd2,
nafees@ieee.org3
Abstract. Blockchain technology has emerged as a disruptive force with
transformative potential across numerous industries, promising efficient
and automated solutions that can revolutionize traditional systems. By
leveraging decentralized ledger systems, blockchain offers enhanced secu-
rity, transparency, and transaction verification without the need for in-
termediaries. The finance sector is exploring blockchain-based solutions
for payments, remittances, lending, and investments, while healthcare
adopts the technology for medical record keeping, supply chain tracking,
and data management. Similarly, supply chain management benefits from
blockchain’s ability to enhance transparency, traceability, and account-
ability from raw materials to finished products. Other sectors, including
real estate, energy, and government, are also investigating blockchain-
based solutions to improve efficiency, security, and transparency. Fur-
thermore, smart contracts within the blockchain enable process automa-
tion, reducing manual intervention in distribution workflows. AidNeux, a
consortium-based blockchain DApp, reimagines the distribution of finan-
cial assistance by addressing inefficiencies and opaqueness. Using smart
contracts ensures the security and directness of money transfers. Its ro-
bust digital identity verification and real-time auditability reduce fraud
risks and strengthen accountability, thereby presenting a scalable, trans-
parent solution to problems inherent to conventional financial aid sys-
tems.
Keywords: Blockchain· Smart Contracts · FinTech · Process Automa-
tion · Decentralized Ledger
1
Introduction
At the advent of the 21st century, unprecedented technological advancements
reshaped the traditional landscape in numerous industries. Blockchain is a dis-
ruptive, revolutionary technology that is widely recognized for its disruptive
potential. In 2008, the pseudonymous entity Satoshi Nakamoto introduced the
digital currency Bitcoin using Blockchain technology. Since then, the evolution
of Blockchain technology has expanded beyond cryptocurrencies and is poised
to revolutionize a vast array of industries, with a particular impact anticipated
arXiv:2311.08372v1  [cs.SE]  14 Nov 2023

--- Page 2 ---
2
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
in the financial sector. This eliminates the need for centralized authorities or
intermediaries [1]. The decentralized, immutable, and transparent nature of
blockchain technology promises to streamline processes, improve efficiency and
security, and cultivate confidence in the financial sector. Moreover, the trans-
formative potential of blockchain also reveals the development of an innovative
on-demand, lightweight commodity delivery system designed to bring unprece-
dented levels of efficiency and transparency to the logistics industry [2].
The fundamental components of blockchain technology are the data struc-
ture, peer-to-peer network, and consensus mechanisms [3]. Data structures or-
ganize transactions into blocks, each with a unique identifier and a hash of
the previous block, thereby ensuring the integrity and security of the data [4].
Peer-to-peer networks enable direct communication between nodes, thereby aug-
menting robustness and efficiency [5,6]. Proof-of-Work (PoW), Proof-of-Stake
(PoS), and Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) are consensus mecha-
nisms that validate transactions and determine the blockchain’s state [7]. There
are three types of blockchain technologies: public, private, and consortium. Pub-
lic blockchains, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, allow for universal participation
but confront scalability, speed, and privacy issues [8]. Private blockchains, which
are under the control of a specific group, offer enhanced efficiency and privacy
at the expense of decentralization [9]. Consortium blockchains provide a bal-
ance by enabling a predefined group of nodes to maintain decentralization while
improving privacy and control [10].Due to its security, transparency, and effi-
ciency, blockchain technology possesses immense transformative potential in the
financial sector. As demonstrated in the paper [11], it can improve cross-border
transactions by reducing complexity and costs while increasing efficiency and
security.
The paper [12] explored how blockchain can expedite trading and stock ex-
change platforms by eliminating intermediaries. Smart contracts, facilitated by
blockchain technology, automate the execution of agreements, reducing enforce-
ment costs and boosting productivity [13]. The immutability and transparency
of blockchain can enhance the auditability of financial transactions by providing
a secure audit trail and streamlining regulatory compliance [14]. The decen-
tralized nature of blockchain offers the financial sector optimistic data security
and fraud detection prospects [15]. As demonstrated by Purohit et al. [16], con-
sortium blockchains that offer a balance between complete transparency and
restricted access have the potential to satisfy the privacy requirements of the
financial industry.
AidNeux is an innovative decentralized application (DApp) utilizing con-
sortium blockchain technology to revolutionize traditional pension systems by
addressing prevalent issues such as inefficiency, lack of transparency, and admin-
istrative complexities. AidNeux’s implementation of automated smart contracts
that dictate the pension amount and delivery schedule for eligible beneficiaries,
thereby eliminating the need for intermediaries and enhancing transparency and
efficiency, is a defining characteristic. In addition, AidNeux includes a trustwor-
thy digital identity verification system that validates pension recipients’ eligibil-

--- Page 3 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
3
ity, utilizing the immutability of blockchain for secure storage and authentication
of identities. This DApp guarantees the direct transfer of pension funds from au-
thorities to beneficiaries, thereby reducing administrative costs and corruption
risks. Its transparency enables real-time auditability of fund distribution, thereby
enhancing accountability and decreasing the likelihood of fraud. AidNeux exem-
plifies a revamped pension fund distribution strategy with its superior scala-
bility and interoperability, effectively leveraging consortium blockchain’s unique
advantages to surmount traditional system challenges.
The purpose of this paper is to provide an overview of the potential transfor-
mative effects of blockchain technology in the financial sector. Section 2 examines
the issue of financial distribution in humanitarian sectors. The purpose of Sec-
tion 3 is to elucidate the fundamental principles of the proposed system, while
Section 4 demonstrates the design and implementation of this system. The paper
concludes with a summary of the blockchain revolution and its future in Section
5.
2
Related Works
Blockchain technology is highly transformative, especially in the financial sec-
tor, as it offers increased efficiency, decreased costs, and enhanced security [7].
This technology provides a more efficient, secure, and cost-effective method for
financial transactions by eliminating the need for intermediaries and enhancing
auditability by virtue of its inherent immutability and transparency [8]. The
financial industry increasingly recognizes the value of consortium blockchain, a
partially private variant managed by a predetermined group of nodes, for its
balance of transparency and privacy. [12,17] This variant has numerous appli-
cations. The authors [11] propose an intelligent cross-border transaction system
based on consortium blockchain, demonstrating the technology’s applicability
outside of the financial sector.
The paper [12] suggests consortium blockchain-based decentralized stock ex-
change platforms can mitigate traditional stock market problems like high op-
erational costs, lack of transparency, and susceptibility to fraud. However, con-
sortium blockchains’ limitations, such as scalability and interoperability with
conventional stock exchanges, may present obstacles. Future research should con-
centrate on these issues and investigate possible innovative implementations in
industry [12]. The researchers [16] advocate for the blockchain consortium system
HonestChain for secure data sharing in health information systems. The system
incorporates the benefits of both public and private blockchains to circumvent
their respective limitations, thereby providing enhanced security, privacy, and
regulatory compliance for the data sharing of health information systems. The
method, which includes attribute-based encryption, access control mechanisms,
and decentralized authorization, enables precise regulation of access to confiden-
tial health information [16].
The Authors [16] indicate the potential of consortium blockchain for im-
proved data privacy and security in health information systems, highlighting

--- Page 4 ---
4
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
its utility for financial institutions requiring secure data sharing. Despite its
infancy, research into blockchain implementations in various industries, includ-
ing pension services [18], is promising. Regulatory constraints, interoperability
concerns, and user adoption are obstacles, but the potential benefits merit fur-
ther investigation [11,19]. This study investigates Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks
(VANETs) - networks of interconnected vehicles that self-organize. These net-
works enable substantial improvements in vehicular communication, transporta-
tion security, and overall traffic management effectiveness [20,21]. Moreover, con-
sortium blockchain enables substantial advances in data sharing and storage in
vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) [15]. Currently, security risks, trust issues,
and storage constraints impede VANET data sharing. Consortium blockchain
addresses these obstacles by providing a secure and transparent platform [15].
However, the ephemeral character of VANETs and their limited computa-
tional resources pose challenges for consortium blockchain implementation. Re-
searchers propose the use of lightweight consensus algorithms, privacy-preserving
mechanisms, and efficient data storage techniques to mitigate these issues [15]. To
thoroughly comprehend the potential and limitations of consortium blockchain
in this context, additional research is required. Despite its limitations, consor-
tium blockchain technology is emerging as a significant instrument in indus-
tries including VANETs, cross-border transactions, and logistics. For example,
a research paper [17] highlights the advantages of consortium blockchain for
secure data interchange and the provision of customized services in intelligent
transportation systems. The introduction of blockchain technology has catalyzed
remarkable transformations in numerous industries, resulting in increased effi-
ciency, security, and cost-effectiveness. The financial sector has shown particular
interest in consortium blockchain technology due to its combination of trans-
parency and anonymity [12].
Consortium blockchain combines features of both public blockchain and pri-
vate blockchain, providing a secure, efficient, and dependable platform for data
exchange and service delivery. In intelligent transportation systems, for instance,
the research [12] argue that a consortium blockchain-based system outperforms
conventional centralized systems, which are more prone to data manipulation
and privacy violations. Smart household systems also have promising implica-
tions for consortium blockchain. The authors, in the research paper [22] proposes
a consortium blockchain system for data privacy protection utilizing homomor-
phic encryption, which enables the processing of encrypted data without de-
cryption. Contextually, consortium blockchain is proposed as a decentralized,
transparent, and secure solution for mobile malware detection [23]. The system
enables collaborative detection and prevention of malware infections across a
network of mobile devices. The consortium blockchain has the potential to im-
prove smart city governance [8]. Proposed is a public participation consortium
blockchain framework to enhance smart city decision-making and citizen partic-
ipation.
The paper [24] demonstrates that the healthcare industry, which is plagued
by data security and access concerns, can benefit substantially from consortium

--- Page 5 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
5
blockchain. The proposed system satisfies the disparate data access requirements
of various stakeholders and enhances the efficacy and security of medical data
management. Additionally, consortium blockchain can improve safety and effec-
tiveness in high-risk industries, such as coal extraction [25]. The proposed so-
lution encourages data sharing, collaboration, and accountability among stake-
holders, resulting in a reduction in safety incidents. In addition, consortium
blockchain systems can improve data accountability and provenance monitoring
[14], which has significant implications for data management in the healthcare,
finance, and government sectors. In data management for smart grids, consor-
tium blockchain can surmount obstacles such as a lack of transparency and trust
[14]. In the pension system, consortium blockchain technology proposes solutions
to increase effectiveness and transparency, enabling secure pension access and
administration [26]. In addition, the combination of consortium blockchain tech-
nology and attribute-based signatures can enhance the privacy protection of
Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) networks [18]. Similar methods, such as multi-party com-
putation and homomorphic encryption, can be utilized to secure smart contracts
[13]. A consortium blockchain can also safeguard peer-to-peer file storage and
sharing [27], whereas a trust-based hierarchical consensus mechanism cannot.
In conclusion, consortium blockchain technology has enormous potential in
a variety of industries. It offers solutions to problems with which conventional
centralized systems have labored and indicates promising future developments
in these fields.
3
Proposed System: Aid Nexus
This section describes the Aid Nexus platform, which aims to improve the trans-
parency and efficacy of humanitarian aid distribution. The design, which is rep-
resented by a block diagram and Unified Modeling Language (UML) models,
illustrates the system’s essential components, their interactions, and object-
oriented characteristics. These provide a clear comprehension of the structure
and functionality of the system, laying the groundwork for future development
and implementation.
3.1
System Overview
The AidNeux system, shown in Fig. 1, operates within a consortium blockchain
framework that includes multiple entities, including a fund-distributing entity,
eligible pension recipients, and potential financial service providers. The princi-
pal node, which is administered by the organizing entity, oversees the system,
including the upkeep of smart contracts, beneficiary registration, fund additions,
and distribution. Pension-eligible recipients represent recipient nodes, which are
authorized by the organization node to interact with the smart contract in order
to verify their account balance or acquire funds. On the Consortium Blockchain
Network, transactions initiated by the organization node, such as fund additions
or distributions, are recorded. Banks and other financial service providers could

--- Page 6 ---
6
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
interact with the smart contract to enable off-chain transactions. When the smart
contract is deployed, the recipient’s banking information is embedded. During
pension distribution, an authorized organization node verifies the status and bal-
ance of the recipient and records the transaction. Recipient nodes can validate
Fig. 1. Aid Nexus Block Diagram
their balances, and financial service providers facilitate off-chain transactions by
retrieving data from the blockchain. All transactions are recorded openly, ensur-
ing security, auditability, and traceability, and the consortium-based structure
improves efficiency and control.
3.2
System Illustrations
The use case diagram for AidNeux’s system, shown in Fig. 2, vividly depicts
the interaction between the various entities and the system itself, providing a
concise illustration of the overall functionality and flow. The ’Organization’ is
depicted as the primary protagonist who carries out the essential duties. These
responsibilities consist of adding and removing recipients, adding funds, sending
allowances, and registering bank accounts. It is evident from this interaction
that the organization possesses the controlling power and serves as the system’s
backbone. The ’Recipient’ is an additional important participant in this system.
Although the recipient does not directly interact with the system, their interac-
tion is implied because they are the recipients of the organization’s payments. In
addition, the diagram clearly delineates responsibilities and interactions, indicat-
ing that the system is well-designed to prevent confusion. With its emphasis on
illustrating how various entities interact with the system, the use case diagram

--- Page 7 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
7
Fig. 2. Aid Nexus Use Case Diagram
[Fig. 2] concisely captures the essence of AidNeux’s operation. It provides an ex-
cellent method for visually communicating complex processes and interactions
in a way that is easily understood. The interaction between these actors and
the system exposes a robust and well-structured approach to aid distribution,
which lays the groundwork for an effective, transparent, and secure distribution
of resources.
The activity diagram of the AidNeux system, shown in Fig. 3, illustrates
the sequential sequence of actions that occur within the system. The ’Orga-
nization’, which has the authority to add funds to the system, is the starting
point. Once the funds have been effectively added, the organization will man-
age recipients by adding or removing them based on specific criteria. Evidently,
recipient administration is essential for maintaining the integrity and equity of
the aid distribution process. After properly managing the beneficiaries, the or-
ganization can then register the bank accounts of the authorized recipients. This
phase is essential for ensuring that funds are transferred to the correct accounts,
highlighting the system’s emphasis on security and precision. Finally, the organi-
zation is able to provide recipients with allowances. This action is dependent on
the successful completion of the preceding stages, indicating a well-coordinated
and efficient procedure. Therefore, the activity diagram [Fig. 3] highlights the
sequence of operations within the AidNeux system, illustrating how each action
is a prerequisite for the next and contributing to the system’s overall effective-

--- Page 8 ---
8
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
ness and dependability.
Fig. 3. Aid Nexus Activity Diagram
The class diagram of the AidNeux system, shown in Fig. 4, depicts the struc-
tural relationships and dependencies between the system’s various entities. The
central component of the system is the ’aNp’ class, which represents the smart
contract. This class incorporates several crucial properties, including ’organiza-
tion’, ’recipients’, ’balances’, and ’bankAccounts’. Each attribute serves a dis-
tinct purpose, delineating the smart contract’s properties and its interaction with
the system. The ’organization’ attribute is in charge of administering the entire
system, as it has exclusive permission to invoke vital methods within the class.
The ’Recipients’ attribute denotes the addresses of individuals or organizations
that are eligible to receive the funds. The ’organization’ tightly controls their
administration, including additions and removals. The ’balances’ attribute mon-
itors and maintains the amounts designated to each address. It ensures transpar-
ent monitoring of funds, thereby enhancing the system’s integrity. In contrast,
’BankAccounts’ stores the recipient’s bank account information, which is es-
sential for facilitating transactions. The methods defined within the class, such
as ’addRecipient’, ’removeRecipient’, ’sendAllowance’, ’addFunds’, ’getBalance’,
and ’registerBankAccount’, serve distinct purposes to administer the overall sys-
tem operations. Essentially, the class diagram [Fig. 4] offers valuable insight into

--- Page 9 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
9
Fig. 4. Aid Nexus Class Diagram
the inner workings of the AidNeux system by providing a distinct perspective
on the system’s structure and the interaction between its various components.
4
Development & Implementation of the Proposed
System
The AidNeux architecture, constructed on a consortium blockchain, is centered
on a Solidity-based smart contract, ’aNp’, which administers transactions and
node interactions. The ’organization’, the contract holder, supervises the distri-
bution of funds. It is responsible for deploying the contract, managing recipient
information with the ’addRecipient’, ’removeRecipient’, and ’registerBankAc-
count’ functions, and distributing funds with the ’sendAllowance’ function. Ben-
eficiaries of the fund (’recipients’) can interact with the contract via the ’getBal-
ance’ function, but control over the funds is restricted until disbursement.
Compared to public blockchains, the consortium blockchain network provides
a decentralized, transparent platform for transaction records, thereby enhanc-
ing security and auditability. Potential external parties, such as institutions,
could interact with the system to conduct off-chain fund transfers. These en-
tities would extract transaction information from the blockchain contract and
implement transactions through the conventional banking system. This architec-
ture combines the functionality of smart contracts to provide a secure, efficient,
and transparent platform for pension fund distribution.
4.1
Smart Contract
The aNp (aidnexus) contract, crafted in Solidity, is an adept system for reg-
ulated financial distribution within a consortium blockchain. It’s designed to
manage, secure, and efficiently distribute financial allowances under an authori-
tative organization. The contract facilitates flexible recipient management, allow-
ing additions or removals solely by the organization. The core function permits
the organization to distribute allowances, employing strict rules to verify recip-
ient authorization and check sufficient funds, ensuring secure transactions. The

--- Page 10 ---
10
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
contract further allows the organization to add funds, promoting operational
continuity.
It also links recipient addresses with bank accounts using secure keccak256
encryption, protecting sensitive data while enabling efficient financial transfers.
In essence, the aNp contract leverages blockchain technology for secure, trans-
parent, and efficient financial distribution.
Algorithm 1: Constructor
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller.
Result: Initialize the contract with msg.sender as the organization.
organization = msg.sender;
The constructor function [Algorithm 1] initializes the contract when it’s de-
ployed on the blockchain. In the context of the aNp contract, the constructor
function assigns the contract deployer’s address (represented as msg.sender in
Solidity) as the "organization". The organization is a key actor in this contract,
authorized to execute critical functions such as adding or removing recipients,
sending allowances, adding funds, and registering bank accounts.
Algorithm 2: AddRecipient
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _recipient as the
address of the new recipient.
Result: Add a new recipient.
if msg.sender == organization then
recipients[_recipient] = true;
end
The AddRecipient function [Algorithm 2] is essential for expanding the scope
of the organization’s financial distribution. It allows the organization to autho-
rize new recipients, who can then receive allowances. This function ensures that
only the organization can add recipients, enforcing a layer of access control and
preventing unauthorized entities from manipulating the list of recipients.
Algorithm 3: RemoveRecipient
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _recipient as the
address of the recipient to be removed.
Result: Remove a recipient.
if msg.sender == organization then
recipients[_recipient] = false;
end
The RemoveRecipient function [Algorithm 3] provides the organization with
the ability to revoke the recipient status of an address. This feature is necessary
for managing changes in the system, such as when a recipient is no longer eligible
or when there’s a need to prevent misuse. Like the AddRecipient function, this
function can only be called by the organization, ensuring a secure and controlled
system.

--- Page 11 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
11
Algorithm 4: SendAllowance
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _recipient as the
address of the recipient, _amount as the amount to be sent.
Result: Send allowance to a recipient.
if msg.sender == organization AND recipients[_recipient] == true
AND balances[organization] >= _amount then
balances[organization] -= _amount;
emit AllowanceSent(_recipient, _amount);
end
The SendAllowance function [Algorithm 4] enables the transfer of funds from
the organization to an authorized recipient. Before transferring, the function ver-
ifies that the recipient is authorized and that the organization has enough funds
to cover the transfer. This robust verification procedure ensures the system’s
financial integrity and enforces the rules set by the organization.
Algorithm 5: AddFunds
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller, _amt as the amount to
be added.
Result: Add funds to the organization’s balance.
if msg.sender == organization then
balances[organization] += _amt;
emit FundsAdded(msg.value);
end
The AddFunds function [Algorithm 5] allows the organization to increase its
balance. The added amount can be further utilized to distribute allowances to
the recipients. This function underpins the contract’s operational continuity by
ensuring that the organization can add funds whenever necessary. Moreover, it
records the transaction on the blockchain, providing a traceable financial record.
Algorithm 6: GetBalance
Data: msg.sender as the current function caller.
Result: Return the balance of the function caller.
return balances[msg.sender];
The GetBalance function [Algorithm 6] is a simple yet essential feature of
the contract that allows any address to check its current balance. This feature
promotes transparency and allows the organization and recipients to monitor
their fund levels.

--- Page 12 ---
12
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
Algorithm 7: RegisterBankAccount
Data: msg.sender: Current function caller
Data: _recipient: Recipient address
Data: _account: Account to be registered
Result: A registered bank account for a recipient.
if msg.sender == organization AND recipients[_recipient] == true AND
bytes(_account).length > 0 then
bankAccounts[_recipient] = keccak256(abi.encodePacked(_account));
emit BankAccountRegistered(_recipient, bankAccounts[_recipient]);
end
The RegisterBankAccount function [Algorithm 7] facilitates the association
of bank account details with recipient addresses. It incorporates Keccak256 en-
cryption for storing bank account details, ensuring the privacy and security of
this sensitive information. The organization is responsible for registering bank
accounts, further enhancing system security by centralizing this process.
4.2
Aid Nexus User Interface(UI)
This section introduces the Aid Nexus implementation phase, with an emphasis
on the user interface (UI) of the application. It depicts how the designed com-
ponents interact with one another in a functional context. The AidNeux system
interface, shown in Fig. 5, will likely be an intuitive, user-friendly graphical user
interface (GUI), facilitating access and operation for both organizations and re-
cipients. Through input fields corresponding to smart contract functions such as
addRecipient, removeRecipient, registerBankAccount, and sendAllowance, the
organization can manage recipients, register bank accounts, and distribute funds.
A secure authentication system is likely to be implemented for access to sensi-
Fig. 5. Aid Nexus System Interface
tive, organization-only functions such as getBalance. Although recipients would
not have direct access to getBalance, they would receive transaction updates

--- Page 13 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
13
to ensure system security and transparency. Through the interface, users inter-
act indirectly with the smart contract’s functions, with actions executed on the
backend. The interface may also include alerts for disbursements and data vi-
sualization tools for analyzing transaction trends. Therefore, the interface is a
crucial link between users and the blockchain, facilitating accessibility for non-
technical users.
4.3
System Functionality
The "aNp" smart contract, written in Ethereum’s Solidity programming lan-
guage, provides the system’s fundamental functionality. The contract stipulates
the organization’s address and mappings that maintain a list of recipients, their
balances, and hashed bank account information for confidentiality. A constructor
function assigns the contract-deploying address to the organization, thereby iden-
tifying the system administrator. Certain functions, restricted by the ’onlyOrga-
nization’ modifier, can be conducted only by this address, granting control over
crucial tasks such as recipient management and fund distribution. ’addRecip-
ient’ and’removeRecipient’ allow the organization to modify the recipient list,
whereas’sendAllowance’ enables the distribution of specified funds to authorized
recipients, pending sufficient balance.
The ’addFunds’ function permits the organization to augment the Ether-
based contract funds. The ’getBalance’ function allows any entity to check its
balance, which is beneficial for recipients. The’registerBankAccount’ function
provides a secure method for storing the hashed bank information of the recipi-
ent, which is essential for off-chain fund transfers. Key operations generate event
logs (’AllowanceSent,’ ’FundsAdded,’ and ’BankAccountRegistered’), facilitating
auditing and providing transparency. The contract encapsulates AidNeux’s pri-
mary functionalities while emphasizing security, transparency, and effectiveness.
5
Conclusion and Future Works
In conclusion, blockchain technology, and consortium blockchain in particular,
has immense transformative potential across numerous industries. It provides a
unique combination of transparency and privacy, addressing a number of extant
issues. However, this emerging technology has limitations, notably scalability
and interoperability problems. Future research should concentrate on address-
ing these obstacles while investigating innovative applications across industries.
Moreover, as this technology permeates various industries, it may be necessary to
develop new regulatory frameworks. This technological evolution and the regula-
tory environment will influence the future of consortium blockchain applications
in an undeniable manner.

--- Page 14 ---
14
Md. Raisul Hasan Shahrukh, Md. Tabassinur Rahman, and Nafees Mansoor
References
1. Al Sunaidi, S. J., & Alhaidari, F. A. (2019). A survey of consensus algorithms for
blockchain technology. In 2019 international conference on computer and informa-
tion sciences (iccis) (pp. 1–6).
2. Onee, B. A. H., & Antora, K. F., & Rajme, O. S., & Mansoor, N. (2023). De-
velopment of a Blockchain-Based On-Demand Lightweight Commodity Delivery
System. arXiv, cs.DC, 2307.08050.
3. Lashkari, B., & Musilek, P. (2021). A comprehensive review of blockchain consensus
mechanisms. IEEE Access, 9, 43620–43652.
4. Kim, S.-K., Kim, U.-M., & Huh, J.-H. (2019). A study on improvement of
blockchain application to overcome vulnerability of iot multiplatform security. En-
ergies, 12(3), 402.
5. Yang, G., Lee, K., Lee, K., Yoo, Y., Lee, H., & Yoo, C. (2022). Resource analysis
of blockchain consensus algorithms in hyperledger fabric. IEEE Access, 10, 74902–
74920.
6. Rahman, T., & Mouno, S. I., & Raatul, A. M., & Azad, A. K. A., & Mansoor,
N. (2023). Verifi-Chain: A Credentials Verifier using Blockchain and IPFS. arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2307.05797.
7. Bach, L. M., Mihaljevic, B., & Zagar, M. (2018). Comparative analysis of
blockchain consensus algorithms. In 2018 41st international convention on infor-
mation and communication technology, electronics and microelectronics (mipro)
(pp. 1545–1550).
8. Bai, Y., Hu, Q., Seo, S.-H., Kang, K., & Lee, J. J. (2021). Public participation
consortium blockchain for smart city governance. IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
9(3), 2094–2108.
9. Hao, Y., Li, Y., Dong, X., Fang, L., & Chen, P. (2018). Performance analysis of con-
sensus algorithm in private blockchain. In 2018 ieee intelligent vehicles symposium
(iv) (pp. 280–285).
10. Baliga, A. (2016). The blockchain landscape. Persistent Systems, 3(5). Fan, M., &
Zhang, X. (2019). Consortium blockchain based data aggregation and regulation
mechanism for smart grid. IEEE Access, 7, 35929–35940
11. Fu, Z., Dong, P., Li, S., & Ju, Y. (2021). An intelligent cross-border transaction
system based on consortium blockchain: A case study in shenzhen, china. Plos one,
16(6),E0252489.
12. Al-Shaibani, H., Lasla, N., & Abdallah, M. (2020). “Consortium blockchain-based
decentralized stock exchange platform” IEEE Access, 8, 123711–123725
13. Kosba, A., Miller, A., Shi, E., Wen, Z., & Papamanthou, C. (2016). Hawk: The
blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contracts. In 2016
ieee symposium on security and privacy (sp) (pp. 839–858).
14. Neisse, R., Steri, G., & Nai-Fovino, I. (2017). A blockchain-based approach for data
accountability and provenance tracking. In Proceedings of the 12th international
conference on availability, reliability and security (pp. 1–10).
15. Zhang, X., & Chen, X. (2019), Data security sharing and storage based on a con-
sortium blockchain in a vehicular ad-hoc network. IEEE Access, 7, 58241– 58254.
16. Purohit, S., Calyam, P., Alarcon, M. L., Bhamidipati, N. R., Mosa, A., & Salah, K.
(2021). Honestchain: Consortium blockchain for protected data sharing in health
information systems. Peer-to-peer Networking and Applications, 14(5), 3012–3028.
17. Wang, D., & Zhang, X. (2020). Secure data sharing and customized services
for intelligent transportation based on a consortium blockchain. IEEE Access, 8,
56045–56059.

--- Page 15 ---
Aid Nexus : A Blockchain Based Financial Distribution System
15
18. Wei, G., & Ma, Y. (2021). Privacy protection strategy of vehicle-to-grid network
based on consortium blockchain and attribute-based signature. In Iop conference
series: Earth and environmental science (Vol. 661, p. 012027).
19. Srivastav, R. K., Agrawal, D., Shrivastava, A., et al. (2020). A survey on
vulnerabili- ties and performance evaluation criteria in blockchain technology.
20. Akter, S., & Mansoor, N. (2020). A spectrum aware mobility pattern based routing
protocol for CR-VANETs. 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), 1–6.
21. Mansoor, N., & Hossain, M. I., & Rozario, A., & Zareei, M., & Arreola, A. R.
(2023). A Fresh Look at Routing Protocols in Unmanned Aerial Vehicular Net-
works: A Survey.IEEE Access.
22. She, W., Gu, Z.-H., Lyu, X.-K., Liu, Q., Tian, Z., & Liu, W. (2019). Homomorphic
consortium blockchain for smart home system sensitive data privacy preserving.
IEEE Access, 7, 62058–62070.
23. Gu, J., Sun, B., Du, X., Wang, J., Zhuang, Y., & Wang, Z. (2018). Consor-
tium blockchain-based malware detection in mobile devices. IEEE Access, 6,
12118–12128.
24. Xu, B., Xu, L. D., Wang, Y., & Cai, H. (2022). A distributed dynamic authorisa-
tion method for internet+ medical & healthcare data access based on consortium
blockchain. Enterprise Information Systems, 16(12), 1922757.
25. Qiang, Z., Wang, Y., Song, K., & Zhao, Z. (2021). Mine consortium blockchain: the
application research of coal mine safety production based on blockchain. Security
and Communication Networks, 2021.
26. Andrianova, A., & Hauner, P., & Mcdoland, D. K., & Manning, D. A., & Zerouali,
M. (2022). Akropolis: A global blockchain pensions infrastructure.
27. Peng, S., Bao, W., Liu, H., Xiao, X., Shang, J., Han, L., Xu, Y. (2023). A peer-
to-peer file storage and sharing system based on consortium blockchain. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 141, 197–204.
