
--- Page 1 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
Blockchain-enabled humanitarian aid: A case study 
of the World Food Programme 
Research-in-Progress 
 
Abstract 
While there is a rise in the applications of Blockchain technology in humanitarian and 
development aid programs, our understanding of Blockchain implementation and the 
resulting implications remains scant in this context. This research-in-progress report 
on the research currently underway in the United Nations World Food Progamme –
Building Blocks. Adopting a case study approach, this study explores how the Building 
Block project revolutionizes the aid programs with the application of Ethereum, a 
Blockchain-based distributed computing platform, and what new risk and social 
problems perpetuate with it. The study contributes to the growing stream of 
Information Systems research that focuses on the virtues and vices of using Blockchain 
technology and enhancing the effectiveness of humanitarian aid programmes. As a 
relatively new technology, this study assesses the appropriateness of its usage and 
intends to provide insights to humanitarian and development organizations to consider 
when employing this novel technology. 
Keywords: Blockchain, humanitarian aid, building blocks, World Food Programme, 
Ethereum. 
 
Introduction 
Humanitarian aid defined as “the impartial, independent and neutral provision of aid to those in 
immediate danger” (Rysaback-Smith 2015, p. 5) remains fast growing over the past years with an 
approximate 125 million people in need of humanitarian assistance, 60 million people forced to flee 
their homes, 37 countries affected, and over $20 billion needed (United Nations 2018). Thus, 
humanitarian aid programmes undergo constant pressures to act more effectively and be more strategic 
in their aid efforts. It is without a doubt that technology is instrumental in humanitarian aid efforts 
(Kovács and Spens 2007). Prior studies argue that information systems (IS) are the absolute most crucial 
determinant to predict the success of a disaster relief operation (Long 1997; Sandvik et al. 2014). In line 
with this, the strategic management of humanitarian aid efforts has recognized applications of 
Blockchain technology – decentralized and trustless ledgers recording transactions across a peer-to-
peer network – to revolutionize aid funding transferability, accountability, and transparency (Aranda et 
al. 2019; Zwitter and Boisse-Despiaux 2018). 

--- Page 2 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
The blockchain that operates as a distributed database hosted across a network of multiple participants 
can provide a way to share information and transfer digital assets in a fast, tracked and secure way. This 
shows the potential to transform the humanitarian sector by providing cost savings and traceability of 
information flows, and by reducing transaction times (Zwitter and Boisse-Despiaux 2018). Although 
Blockchain was initially been created to transfer financial value, it is now viewed as having the potential 
to be an efficient and secure way to transfer or share any information or asset. This is being leveraged 
in some humanitarian aid programmes, i.e., Building Blocks, to provide and manage IDs in refugee 
camps, distribute and trace aid funding, or create trustworthy land registries, etc. (World Food Program 
2018; Zambrano et al. 2018). However, Blockchain is viewed with some doubt given its complex nature 
and the fact that it requires electricity and internet access, features that many humanitarian crisis areas 
do not readily and reliably provide (Riani 2018). Thereby, arising uncertainties and concerns about the 
implementation of Blockchain. At the same time, there is a debate about potential cyber risks – mostly 
theoretical, since the Blockchain technology is considered extremely secure (Kewell et al. 2017), but 
may create doubt and social insecurity among the aid beneficiaries. For instance, the implementation of 
EyePay – where a refugee pays by scanning their iris – at Building Blocks project by United Nations 
World Food Progamme (UNWFP) may provide the convenience, transparency, and security in 
transactions (World Food Program 2018; Zambrano et al. 2018). However, according to civil rights 
activists, it tends to violate a person's right to freedom as it can track individuals (Zwitter and Boisse-
Despiaux 2018). 
The research adopts a case study approach of a UNWFP pilot – Building Blocks project – that is based 
on the Ethereum protocol, a Blockchain-based distributed computing platform, to explore the 
implementation of Blockchain, ethical constraints, and the new risk or social problems that perpetuated 
with it. The findings are intended to enrich the understanding of the benefits and pitfalls of Blockchain 
particularly to humanitarian aid programmes. These findings will contribute to the debate on how to 
make humanitarian aid more effective. Considering Blockchain a relatively new technology, this study 
assesses the appropriateness of its usage and intends to provide insights to humanitarian and 
development organizations to consider when employing this novel technology. 
The structure of this research-in-progress paper is as follows. The next section informs on the theoretical 
background of the key elements of our research topic. It is followed by a contextual background of the 
research setting, the research design, and the adopted methodology. The next section informs on our 
preliminary findings. The final section discusses the expected contributions that address the identified 
gaps in knowledge. In doing so, we also discuss how we intend to take this research-in-progress forward. 
Theoretical background 
Blockchain as a disruptive technology 
Blockchain has emerged as a disruptive technology to reshape the digital tools we use to conduct day-
to-day transactions. Blockchain was first introduced to lay the foundations for cryptocurrencies, i.e., 
Bitcoin, it was soon recognized as the “incorruptible digital ledger” (Tapscott and Tapscott 2016) that 
is programmable to record not just financial transactions but virtually everything of value. It is defined 
as the distributed ledger technology, which combines BitTorrent peer-to-peer sharing with public-key 
cryptography (McPhee and Ljutic 2017; Swan 2015). Its algorithm runs over a file to compress it, 
creating a unique 64-character code (the hash), which is then included in the Blockchain with a 
timestamp to prove existing digital assets at that particular moment. Besides traditional ledger books, 
the Blockchain database is shared across a network of computers (Purvis 2017). All transactions through 
blockchain are transparent, but the identities of the parties are shielded (Boucher 2017; Lee and 
Pilkington 2017). Whenever an individual makes a transaction on the Blockchain, this is broadcasted 
to the network. It functions without any central control system and stores the transaction history in 
blocks of data that are cryptographically locked together. As it is replicated on every computer that 
belongs to the network, it is an immutable, secure, and transparent record of all transactions that have 
ever taken place (Drescher 2017; Kewell et al. 2017; McPhee and Ljutic 2017). 
Organizations may also choose to work through a private Blockchain, whereby people need permission 
from the organization to work with that Blockchain. This offers closed, transparent, and protected 

--- Page 3 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
transactions for individuals, businesses, and governments, which explains is a rapid rise of investments 
in this technology (Kshetri 2017). For instance, Walmart uses blockchain to track the movement of 
Chines pork and to ensure safe trade (Nash 2016). IBM starts to monitor the movement of diamonds, 
and Toyota Motor Corp. is developing solutions to track auto parts (ibid.). Recently, Blockchain 
technology has been getting increased attention in the humanitarian aid programme. Development 
organizations such as the United Nations have been gradually embracing Blockchain, with as many as 
seven UN entities trying Blockchain initiatives as alternative ways to support aid efforts (Riani 2018). 
Blockchain and humanitarian aid programmes 
As Blockchain technology continues to gain momentum across sectors, the development and 
humanitarian sectors look to adapt this new technology to help address ongoing challenges. For 
instance, Bartoletti et al. (2018) examined 120 Blockchain-enabled social good projects (defined as 
those that have pre-eminent goals coherent with those of the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Goals) and found that most of them were primarily focused on philanthropy (30.8%), the environment 
(20%), and financial inclusion (18.3%). The applications of Blockchain technology in the development 
and humanitarian sectors seem less likely to confine to its original idea of cryptocurrency (Blockchain 
1.0) but show most promise in wider aspects, i.e., automatizing logistical processes (Aranda et al. 2019; 
Lee and Pilkington 2017; Tapscott and Tapscott 2016), and informational infrastructures, such as the 
management of digital identity – smart contracts (Blockchain 2.0) (Zambrano et al. 2018; Zwitter and 
Boisse-Despiaux 2018).  
The existing research in IS provides valuable information on Blockchain. A number of studies provide 
either very brief examples of originations, projects, or initiatives that use Blockchain (e.g., Kewell et 
al. 2017; Kshetri 2017; Zwitter and Boisse-Despiaux 2018), or very short case studies of such firms as 
an example to support theoretical developments (Galen et al. 2018). The former provide a good source 
to signpost researchers to look into such organizations individually. These studies serve more as a 
primer to understanding the spectrum of possible applications of Blockchain in the field of humanitarian 
aid programmes as opposed to gaining an in-depth understanding of the implementation or its 
implications. The latter is beneficial for brief overviews of projects, initiatives, or organizations using 
Blockchain for social good but lacks depth in its explanations. 
However, humanitarian aid programmes need research and development to investigate further how 
Blockchain technology can be adapted to address humanitarian challenges (Ko and Verity 2016). The 
technology alone cannot solve fundamental issues within the sector, but it can offer new insights and 
provide a new tool for solving some of these challenges. The research to carefully consider and weigh 
the pros and cons of the use of Blockchain in the humanitarian aid industry can provide a clear view on 
how to adapt Blockchain. Therefore, further research to investigate implementation, benefits, impacts, 
risks and required resources is necessary to understand what applications and use cases are most 
appropriate for Blockchain technology in the humanitarian sector. 
Methodology 
Given the exploratory nature of our research, we adopted a grounded theory building approach that 
follows the principles of emergence, where relevant concepts develop through the systematic generation 
and conceptualization of data (Glaser et al. 1968). This research project was initiated by focusing on a 
research problem that was currently experienced by practitioners and showed limited information in IS 
literature, i.e., implementation and consequences of Blockchain in humanitarian aid programmes. 
Therefore, the initial informal discussion with our key respondents was based very broadly to shed light 
on why Blockchain is necessary for humanitarian aid, how it is implemented, and what are social, legal, 
and economic consequences of implementing this novel technology. We take an approach where 
specific research objectives and research questions will materialize from the collected data through 
conceptualization based on theoretical sensitivity (Turner 1981). Therefore, we accepted the initial 
confusion and data complexity to allow relevant findings to emerge, giving utmost care to avoid forcing 
existing theory onto our interviewees and data (Urquhart 2012). This conceptualist grounded theory 
methodology provides a better fit with our theory-building research objective, answers the call for more 

--- Page 4 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
grounded theories in unique IS contexts (Birks et al. 2013). We used a case study approach for data 
collection that allows a thorough examination of this complex, real-life issue on which little prior 
empirical evidence is available, leading to new, in-depth insights (Edmondson and McManus 2007; 
Eisenhardt 1989; Yin 2009). Further, the case study approach supports our extraction of rich data 
through a range of techniques (e.g., interviews, observations, and document analysis) and facilitates 
cross-validation (Siggelkow 2007), thereby aiding external validity, guarding against observer bias, and 
creating more testable and robust theory (Eisenhardt 1989; Yin 2009).  
Research context and case selection 
Since the use of Blockchain technology is still very new, many projects undertaken by international 
humanitarian organizations are pilots. This research investigates the case that implemented a pilot 
project to use Blockchain technology in a refugee camp in Jordan, called Building Blocks, by the United 
Nations World Food Programme. WFP pilot project implemented the applications of Blockchain, 
mainly in the authentication and registration of transaction processes. The first pilot executed this 
experiment in Pakistan in 2017 and, building on lessons learned, the WFP built and implemented a 
Blockchain system in a refugee camp in Jordan as a second scaled-up pilot. The Jordanian camp 
accommodates more than 100,000 refugees where WFP track, record, and verify all transactions and 
entitlements using Blockchain (Juskalian 2018). The transaction is recorded by creating virtual wallets 
for every beneficiary – an estimate as of October 2018 records 100,500 beneficiaries served 
US$1,000,000 undergoing 100,000 transactions (World Food Program 2018).  
The innovative implementation in this pilot project is that the refugees were identified by recording the 
scans of their eyes (iris), which registers on the Blockchain. This biometric authentication technology 
allowed refugees to shop in a camp-based supermarket and pay by scanning their iris, instead of using 
a credit card or cash. Iris scan confirmed refugee’s identity in the WFP database (Juskalian 2018), which 
allowed identification and registration of the refugee need to track buying behavior. Although the eye 
scans were implemented before the introduction of Blockchain at the camp, the registration, 
identification, and tracking data was stored using Blockchain technology. Building Blocks is based on 
the Ethereum protocol, which is a Blockchain-based distributed computing platform. It runs on a 
custom-built Blockchain, with no possibility of fraud, censorship or third-party interference (Juskalian 
2018; Zambrano et al. 2018). Building Blocks runs on a private permission Blockchain allowing WFP 
control over who joins the network. WFP claims the pilot was successful and that they plan to expand 
this project over 500,000 Syrian refugees in Jordan (World Food Program 2018).  
The choice of Building Blocks case was made because this pilot project was based on the lessons learned 
from the previous experiments that the WFP has conducted in 2017 with the applications of Blockchain. 
Moreover, the UN and the WFP are highly respected and legitimate agencies in the international aid 
architecture. The use of Blockchain by these agencies adds credibility and raises the level of trust in the 
technology. The Building Blocks project provides a suitable contemporary and appealing setting that is 
aligned with the objectives of this research, i.e., to understand the implementation and implications of 
Blockchain in humanitarian aid programmes, 
Data collection 
The case will be examined mainly through semi-structured interviews as the primary data source. Due 
to the exploratory nature of your research objectives, it is beneficial to allow participants to describe 
their perceptions freely (King 2004). These interviews will be supplemented by other methods including 
written documentation (internal project reports, official announcements, newspaper clippings, archival 
records, organizational charts, and meeting minutes). The use of such several methods is an effective 
strategy to ensure the triangulation of data, which qualitative researchers especially need to test the 
validity of data (Carter et al. 2013; Eisenhardt 1989; Yin 2009). Using multiple methods also provides 
a more holistic perspective, validates the data, and enables each method to compensate for the 
shortcomings of the others (Yin 2009). The interviews will be mainly with interviews with the 
respondents directly or indirectly involved in the WFP Building Blocks project. Table 1 highlights our 
approach to data collection.  

--- Page 5 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
Table 1: Sources of evidence for a case stuyd approach (adapted from Yin 2018) 
Source of 
Evidence 
Examples 
Approaches being 
used  in this study 
Strengths 
Weaknesses 
Documentation E-mails, letters, 
agendas, administrative 
documents, formal 
studies, news clippings 
News articles, formal 
studies, reports of 
conferences 
Stable, 
specific, 
unobtrusive 
Retrievability, 
biased 
selectivity, 
reporting bias 
Archival 
Records 
Public use files, service 
records, organisational 
records, maps, survey 
data 
Case records (e.g. 
annual WFP report), 
maps and charts of the 
camps 
Precise, 
stable, 
specific, 
unobtrusive 
Retrievability, 
accessibility, 
reporting bias 
Interviews 
Prolonged interviews, 
short interviews, 
survey interview 
Interviews 
(direct/indirect 
involved individuals) 
Targeted, 
insightful 
Response bias, 
human error, 
reflexivity 
Direct 
Observations 
Field observations 
Field observations to 
be conducted 
Real time 
data, 
contextual 
Time 
consuming, 
reflexivity 
Participant 
Observation 
Participant 
observations 
Field observations to 
be conducted 
Insightful 
Time 
consuming 
Physical 
Artefact 
Tools, instruments, 
works of art 
N/A 
Insightful 
Selectivity, 
availability 
 
The interviews are one of the most important and most common data collection resources in case study 
approaches. However, careful considerations should be used to evade the common pitfalls, i.e., 
artificiality, level of entry, elite bias (Myers and Newman 2007). Our data collection to date has paid 
close attention to evade these issues. For example, WFP staff that were contacted and/or interviewed 
for the case study were made sure to be involved in the Building Blocks project and represented various 
levels of seniority. Some of the respondents contacted were based in the field, while others worked on 
the project from long-distance with frequent visits to the project site. Respondents were made sure to 
be experienced and knowledgeable about the project. Table 2 presents an overview of the details of the 
interviewees and the conducted interviews thus far. 
Table 2: Details of interviews and respondents 
Respondent 
Gender 
Title 
Interview Structure 
Information 
capture 
Interview 
Length 
A 
Male 
WFP 
Executive 
Semi-structured 
interview, video call 
Recorded, 
note-taking 
1 hour 
B 
Male 
WFP Project 
Officer 
Structured, written 
question & answer via 
e-mail 
N/A 
N/A 
C 
Female 
WFP Project 
Officer 
Structured, written 
question & answer via 
e-mail 
N/A 
N/A 
D 
Male 
External expert 
commentator 
Unstructured 
interview, video call 
Extensive 
Note-taking 
30 minutes 
 
The analysis of the data will follow the comprehensive approach Corbin and Strauss (2014 that include 
three coding procedures: open coding, axial coding, and selective coding. This approach is specifically 
suitable for such research that intends to explore and build theory from data because it allows flexibility 
and adds rigor (Urquhart 2012).  
Our preliminary findings, based on four in-depth interviews (Table 2) and reading through secondary 
data sources (e.g., WFP annual reports, news clippings, public use files on Building Blocks, etc.) 

--- Page 6 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
illustrate how political, economic, social and technological factors affect the humanitarian aid 
programme when implementing Blockchain, i.e., “the political and financial sphere in Jordan reflects 
skepticism around technology in general, let alone nascent technologies like Blockchain” (Respondent 
A). WFP Respondents also discussed a significant shift in workload with Blockchain implementation, 
i.e., “Previously, banks needed a letter of authorization with a physical copy signed by two people that 
had to then be sent back to them and evaluated which was time-consuming and not always done right 
or on time. Every transaction is now authorized by WFP so there doesn’t need to be a reconciliation of 
[reports].” (Respondent C). Energy consumption. Speed in validating transactions, and privacy were 
the three major concerns highlighted, i.e., Blockchain is a high energy-consuming technology …. at the 
minimum, it does require servers and computers to process transactions. The locations where the 
limited access to the Internet or poor energy infrastructure with frequent brownouts limits the 
scalability of Blockchain.   
Intended Contributions and Conclusion 
This research, although at an early stage, is expected to make significant theoretical contributions to IS; 
particularly related to implementation and consequences of Blockchain in Humanitarian aid 
programmes. Although we adopt the approach in which specific research objectives and research 
questions will materialize from the collected data through conceptualization based on theoretical 
sensitivity, the intended objectives are to understand how the humanitarian aid porgramme adapt 
Blockchain technology to address humanitarian challenges and reflects on potentials and pitfalls that 
come with the adaptation of this new technology. The findings will contribute to respond the call for 
further research on Blockchain technology in humanitarian context (Ko and Verity 2016). Furthermore, 
by theorizing Blockchain technology in the context of organizational change and transformation, this 
research will contribute to a better understanding of change management and orchestrating aspects of 
implementing a novel technology. With the fast growth in humanitarian aid services, there is an ongoing 
debate on how to reshape the aid programme to enhance its effectiveness to implement aid services in 
the best possible way (Scott 2014). The findings of this research will contribute to this debate by 
reflecting on the benefits and implementations strategies to reduce the pitfalls of Blockchain 
technology. 
In sum, we argue here that our research provides a great opportunity to address the above gaps. 
Additionally, the proposed research is expected to contribute to practice by providing insights for 
humanitarian and development organizations to consider when employing this novel technology.   
References 
Aranda, D. A., Fernández, L. M. M., and Stantchev, V. 2019. "Integration of Internet of Things (IoT) 
and Blockchain to Increase Humanitarian Aid Supply Chains Performance," 5th International 
Conference on Transportation Information and Safety (ICTIS), UK: IEEE, pp. 140-145. 
Bartoletti, M., Cimoli, T., Pompianu, L., and Serusi, S. 2018. "Blockchain for Social Good: A 
Quantitative Analysis," Proceedings of the 4th EAI International Conference on Smart Objects 
and Technologies for Social Good, Bologna, Italy: ACM, pp. 37-42. 
Birks, D. F., Fernandez, W., Levina, N., and Nasirin, S. 2013. "Grounded Theory Method in Information 
Systems Research: Its Nature, Diversity and Opportunities," European Journal of Information 
Systems (22:1), pp. 1-8. 
Boucher, P. 2017. How Blockchain Technology Could Change Our Lives: In-Depth Analysis. European 
Parliament. 
Carter, N., Bryant-Lukosius, D., DiCenso, A., Blythe, J., and Neville, A. J. 2013. "The Use of 
Triangulation in Qualitative Research," Oncology Nursing Forum. 
Corbin, J., and Strauss, A. 2014. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for 
Developing Grounded Theory. Sage publications. 
Drescher, D. 2017. "Blockchain Basics: A Non-Technical Introduction in 25 Steps." Apress, New York. 
Edmondson, A. C., and McManus, S. E. 2007. "Methodological Fit in Management Field Research," 
Academy of Management Review (32:4), pp. 1246-1264. 

--- Page 7 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. "Building Theories from Case Study Research," Academy of Management 
Review (14:4), pp. 532-550. 
Galen, D., Brand, N., Boucherle, L., Davis, R., Do, N., El-Baz, B., Kimura, I., Wharton, K., and Lee, J. 
2018. "Blockchain for Social Impact: Moving Beyond the Hype," Center for Social Innovation, 
RippleWorks. https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/sites/gsb/files/publication-pdf/study-blockchain-
impact-moving-beyond-hype_0.pdf). 
Glaser, B. G., Strauss, A. L., and Strutzel, E. 1968. "The Discovery of Grounded Theory; Strategies for 
Qualitative Research," Nursing research (17:4), p. 364. 
Juskalian, R. 2018. "Inside the Jordan Refugee Camp That Runs on Blockchain," 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/610806/inside-the-jordanrefugee-camp-that-runs-on-
blockchain/). 
Kewell, B., Adams, R., and Parry, G. 2017. "Blockchain for Good?," Strategic Change (26:5), pp. 429-
437. 
King, N. 2004. "Using Interviews in Quatitative Research," Essential guide to qualitative methods in 
organizational research (2), pp. 11-22. 
Ko, V., and Verity, A. 2016. "Blockchain for the Humanitarian Sector: Future Opportunities," Digital 
Humanitarian Network for UN-OCHA, pp. 1-19. 
Kovács, G., and Spens, K. M. 2007. "Humanitarian Logistics in Disaster Relief Operations," 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management (37:2), pp. 99-114. 
Kshetri, N. 2017. "Will Blockchain Emerge as a Tool to Break the Poverty Chain in the Global South?," 
Third World Quarterly (38:8), pp. 1710-1732. 
Lee, J.-H., and Pilkington, M. 2017. "How the Blockchain Revolution Will Reshape the Consumer 
Electronics Industry [Future Directions]," IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine (6:3), pp. 19-
23. 
Long, D. 1997. "Logistics for Disaster Relief: Engineering on the Run," Institute of Industrial and 
Systems Engineers (IISE) Solutions (29:6), pp. 26-30. 
McPhee, C., and Ljutic, A. 2017. "Blockchain," Technology Innovation Management Review (7:10), 
pp. 3-5. 
Myers, M. D., and Newman, M. 2007. "The Qualitative Interview in Is Research: Examining the Craft," 
Information and Organization (17:1), pp. 2-26. 
Nash, K. S. 2016. "Wal-Mart Turns to Blockchain for Tracking Pork in China," Wall Street Journal). 
Purvis, K. 2017. "Blockchain: What Is It and What Does It Mean for Development," The Guardian  
https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-
professionalsnetwork/2017/jan/17/blockchain-digital-technology-development-money. 
Riani, T. 2018. "Blockchain for Social Impact in Aid and Development." Humanitarian Advisory 
Group. 
Rysaback-Smith, H. 2015. "History and Principles of Humanitarian Action," Turkish Journal of 
Emergency Medicine (15:1), pp. 5-7. 
Sandvik, K. B., Jumbert, M. G., Karlsrud, J., and Kaufmann, M. 2014. "Humanitarian Technology: A 
Critical Research Agenda," International Review of the Red Cross (96:893), pp. 219-242. 
Scott, R. 2014. "Imagining More Effective Humanitarian Aid,"). 
Siggelkow, N. 2007. "Persuasion with Case Studies," Academy of Management Journal (50:1), pp. 20-
24. 
Swan, M. 2015. Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy. O'Reilly Media, Inc. 
Tapscott, D., and Tapscott, A. 2016. Blockchain Revolution: How the Technology Behind Bitcoin Is 
Changing Money, Business, and the World. Penguin, UK. 
Turner, B. A. 1981. "Some Practical Aspects of Qualitative Data Analysis: One Way of Organising the 
Cognitive Processes Associated with the Generation of Grounded Theory," Quality and 
Quantity (15:3), pp. 225-247. 
United Nations. 2018. "Humanitarian Assistance and Assistance to Refugees." 
Urquhart, C. 2012. Grounded Theory for Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide. Sage. 
World 
Food 
Program. 
2018. 
"Blockchain 
for 
Zero 
Hunger 
– 
Building 
Blocks." 
https://innovation.wfp.org/project/building-blocks. 
Yin, R. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th edn.). Thousand Oaks: Sage. 

--- Page 8 ---
 
Blockchain-enabled Humanitarin Aid 
 
 
 
Twenty-Fourth  Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems, Dubai, UAE, 2020  
Zambrano, R., Young, A., and Velhurst, S. 2018. "Connecting Refugees to Aid through Blockchain-
Enabled Id Management: World Food Programme’s Building Blocks," New York: GOVLAB 
https://blockchan.ge/blockchange-resource-provision.pdf. 
Zwitter, A., and Boisse-Despiaux, M. 2018. "Blockchain for Humanitarian Action and Development 
Aid," Journal of International Humanitarian Action (3:1), p. 16. 
 
