
--- Page 1 ---
1
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY 
IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
A PILOT PROJECT IN CASH TRANSFER PROGRAMMING IN KENYA
ICHA Publication no: 3/2018

--- Page 2 ---
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
2

--- Page 3 ---
•	 Blockchain Technology can transform the 
humanitarian sector by saving costs, tracing the 
flow of information, and reducing transaction 
times.
•	 In theory, Blockchain Technology can provide 
a better record of where humanitarian aid 
is directed and fight corruption through 
transparency.
•	 Blockchain Technology can also be utilised 
in information management, identification, 
supply chain tracking, cash programming, and 
humanitarian financing.
•	 Further research on the impact of Blockchain 
Technology 
should 
be 
conducted 
and 
experimentation with future implementation.
KEY 
MESSAGES
3

--- Page 4 ---
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
4

--- Page 5 ---
1.0 Introduction		
	
	
	
	
	
6
1.1 Blockchain Technology	
	
	
	
	
7
1.2 Blockchain Technology in Humanitarian Programming	
8
1.3 Purpose of the Study	 	
	
	
	
	
13
2.0 The Pilot Project	
	
	
	
	
	
14
3.0 Results and Discussion	
	
	
	
	
16
3.1 The Approach	
	
	
	
	
	
16
3.2 Successes	
	
	
	
	
	
	
18
3.3 Lessons Learnt	
	
	
	
	
	
24
3.4 Challenges of Blockchain in Humanitarian Programming	
26
4.0 Conclusion and Recommendations	 	
	
	
28
4.1 Conclusion	 	
	
	
	
	
	
28
4.1 Recommendations	
	
	
	
	
	
30
Frequently Asked Questions	
	
	
	
	
31
T
a
b
l
e
 
o
f 
Contents
5

--- Page 6 ---
In the ever-changing environment of humanitarian aid, there are a few constants. One is the need for humanitarian 
organisations to find innovative ways to be efficient and effective in aid delivery and still remain financially 
feasible. Another is accountability and transparency to communities and donors because of reduced donations 
to aid organisations due to geopolitics and mistrust. As a humanitarian organisation, Kenya Red Cross Society 
(KRCS) has also felt the brunt of these changes and to overcome the barriers, they have adopted innovation as 
part of the organisations’ core values. Innovation in the context of KRCS means identifying opportunities for 
risk mitigation, sustainability and growth through exploring uncharted opportunities (KRCS Strategy 2020). 
This is done through the use of Information Communication and Technology (ICT) and the International Centre 
for Humanitarian Affairs (ICHA) innovation and research units. 
1.0	 Introduction
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
6

--- Page 7 ---
The Blockchain is a 
type of decentralised 
database that records 
transactions shared 
across a network of 
multiple participants.
1.1 Blockchain Technology
The Blockchain is a type of decentralised database 
that records transactions shared across a network of 
multiple participants. It was first used to exchange 
the digital currency Bitcoin1. The database is hosted 
across a network of multiple participants and enables 
sharing of information and transfer of digital assets in 
a fast, tracked and secure way2. Blockchain maintains 
a continually growing list of data records, where all 
participants within a network have their own identical 
copy of the ledger. Thus, any changes to the ledger 
are reflected in all copies close to real time.  
The security and accuracy of the information stored 
in the ledger is maintained cryptographically through 
the use of digital signatures3. Hence, once the data 
is uploaded, the cryptography technology makes it 
very difficult for data to be manipulated. The more a 
transaction is validated by users the more authentic 
it becomes. After it is verified it is combined with 
other transactions through a hash and a new block is 
created for the ledger4.
Blockchain Technology stores data in the block 
and the header, where only the header is visible to 
the public. For instance, when storing personal 
data, anyone can verify information added to the 
blockchain due to individual signatures, but only 
the owner can unlock the underlying information 
with their cryptographic signature. Public visibility; 
private usage5.
1Nakamoto, S. (2009), Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Retrieved from: bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
2Vanessa Ko and Andrej Verity (OCHA), Blockchain for the Humanitarian Sector: Future Opportunities
3United Kingdom Government Office for Science (2016). Distributed Ledger Technology: Beyond Blockchain. Retrieved from: www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/492972/gs-16-1-distributed-ledger-technology.pdf
4Chris McPhee and Anton Ljutic, “Blockchain,” Technology Innovation Management Review Vol. 7 Issues 10 (2017)
5This may not be true for all blockchains. For example, on the Bitcoin blockchain, all information is public. However, it is pseudonymized, making it difficult to determine the owner, though it may 
be possible through things such as graph analysis: blockchain. info/block/0000 000 000000000011eb70a82a16f9e 044eedaee22d34c88ad55412ddc362bb
7

--- Page 8 ---
1.2 Blockchain Technology in Humanitarian Programming
Blockchain Technology has the potential to provide 
substantial benefits in the humanitarian sector, 
such as protected data sharing, supply chain, donor 
financing, cash programmes and crowdfunding. 
By providing a decentralised, verifiable source of 
data, Blockchain Technology can enable a more 
transparent, efficient form of information and data 
management.
In the humanitarian sector, unreliable information 
and information silos between different humanitarian 
actors is often cited as a key barrier in information 
management6. 
Blockchain 
can 
overcome 
the 
barriers to data sharing by providing an information 
marketplace that is publicly accessible to all users 
while ensuring information security. A combination 
of time-stamped and digitally verified information 
hosted on an accessible ledger could play an important 
role in reducing costs and increasing transparency 
with humanitarian data7.
Lack of identification documents is a key challenge in 
humanitarian response and early recovery systems8. 
Having basic documentation to verify one’s identity 
is fundamental to survival and security, as they are 
essential to obtain basic humanitarian assistance 
and reach areas of safety. Blockchain can provide 
accessible and verifiable identification where a 
person can prove their existence and identity through 
a distributed public ledger, akin to an international 
public notary9. This enables a decentralsed personal 
data-management system that individuals own and 
control10. Since information is protected using 
encryption, the technology can protect the personal 
data of those who are most vulnerable.
Humanitarian supply chain can be extremely 
dynamic. As a result, supply chain visibility and data 
tracing is often poor11. Strengthening supply chain 
transparency can greatly improve humanitarian 
operation by providing data to inform more effective 
and accurate decisions. This will ensure evidence-
6Humanitarian Information Management Failures; Survey Report (2016).  
7McConaughey, T. et al, BigChainDB: A Scalable Blockchain Database (Tech.), Berlin: Ascribe GmbH (2016)
8ICRC Advisory Service on International Humanitarian Law. Means of Personal Identification; Retrieved from: www.icrc.org/eng/assets/files/other/means_of_personal_id_eng.pdf
9Rhodes III, Y. (31 May 2016), What does identity mean in today’s physical and digital world?; Retrieved from: azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/what-does-identity-mean-in-today-s-physical-
and-digital-world/. 
10Zyskind, G., Nathan, O., & Pentland, A. (2015), Decentralizing Privacy: Using Blockchain to Protect Personal Data. 2015 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops. doi:10.1109/spw.2015.27. 
11Privett, N. (24 February 2014), Improving visibility in humanitarian supply chains - ODI HPN; Retrieved from: odihpn.org/blog/improving-visibility-in-humanitarian-supply-chains/  
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
8

--- Page 9 ---
based interventions and management, exposing issues 
for an effective remedy and increasing accountability. 
By providing a publicly visible ledger, Blockchain 
Technology offers a way to introduce transparency in 
humanitarian supply chains. In this case, Blockchain 
can be used as a data platform that traces the origins, 
use and destination of humanitarian supplies. As a 
share, secure record of exchange, Blockchain can 
“track what went into a product and who handled 
it along the way, breaking supply chain data out of 
silos, and revealing the provenance of a product to 
everyone involved from the originator to end user”12.
The need for more flexible, efficient, transparent 
and effective donor financing must be underscored. 
This is coupled with a call for greater visibility 
and transparency in financing, not only to address 
corruption and misuse of funds, but also to enable 
humanitarian actors better identify funding gaps based 
on impact rather than institutional requirements13. 
Through Blockchain, humanitarian actors can have 
better control on the distribution of aid and ensure 
that funds reach the intended recipients by lowering 
transaction cost, getting rid of intermediaries and 
publicly tracking commitments, distribution and use 
(transparency).
12Williams, R. (31 May 2015), How Bitcoin Tech Could Make Supply Chains More Transparent; Retrieved from: www.coindesk.com/how-bitcoins-technology-could-make-supply-chains-
more-transparent/
13IASC Task Team on Humanitarian Financing, Background document for the Future of Humanitarian Financing dialogues, October 2014; interagencystandingcommittee.org/system/files/
fhf_looking_beyond_the_crisis_report.pdf
Through Blockchain, humanitarian actors can have 
better control on the distribution of aid and ensure 
that funds reach the intended recipients by lowering 
transaction cost, getting rid of intermediaries and 
publicly tracking commitments, distribution and use 
(transparency).
9

--- Page 10 ---
Cash-based programming often relies on digital 
technology, thus considerations on data exchange 
standards, data security, privacy, and encryption 
are critical to the process14. The biggest challenge 
in cash-based programming is the use of centralised 
databases limiting data security and sharing 
information across multiple actors. A shared platform 
based on Blockchain can allow humanitarian actors 
to easily and responsibly share population and usage 
trends and anonymised transaction data, reducing 
the beneficiary survey fatigue. Digital cash payments 
can be made traceable, interoperable across multiple 
actors, more secure and at a lower cost through 
Blockchain Technology, with the possibility of 
tracking funds from original donor to final recipient 
while still ensuring privacy and security15.
Blockchain Technology can also be used in 
crowdfunding during emergencies by using existing 
digital currencies and by providing a decentralised 
14United Nations World Food Programme, Information technology for cash-based transfers; Retrieved from: www.wfp.org/node/649700
15Currion, P. (2015), AidCoin: a revolution in humanitarian financing; Retrieved from: medium.com/@paulcurrion/introduction-513f86ed92df#.2dz4l3166
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
10

--- Page 11 ---
As funds are processed on 
a peer-to-peer basis, the 
amounts can be approved 
and transferred directly to 
the recipients.
funding platform. United Nations Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 
Crowdfunding for Emergencies Think Brief reports 
that “increasing transparency, accountability and 
reporting among donors, project initiators and 
funding recipient’s increases trust in the project and 
ensures continued donor engagement16”.
Blockchain can increase transparency, accountability 
and trust by providing a verifiable platform. Examples 
of crowdfunding programs using Bitcoin and other 
cryptocurrencies to fund humanitarian emergencies 
include Colu, BTC Funding, CoinFunder and 
BitPesa, which have lower transaction costs and 
ensure transparent and rapid disbursement of funds 
during crises.
Furthermore, crowdfunding initiatives go beyond 
digital currencies, whereby Blockchain removes 
the need for an intermediary third party to monitor 
and disburse funds. Such platforms use Blockchain 
Technology to reduce transaction costs and enable 
rapid disbursement of micropayments. 
As funds are processed on a peer-to-peer basis, the 
amounts can be approved and transferred directly to 
the recipients. Through the introduction of its own 
dedicated cryptocurrency, the humanitarian sector 
could reduce transaction times and exchange-rate 
losses while maintaining transparency and traceability 
of funds17.
Since the inception of Blockchain Technology, the 
endorsement in the humanitarian world has been 
minimal at best. With the scepticism surrounding the 
technology due to its decentralised and unchecked 
nature, humanitarian organisations are shying away 
from using it. For those organisations that have used 
Blockchain Technology as part of their aid delivery, 
most have shown that it does have a significant 
positive impact.
16United Nations OCHA, “Crowdfunding for Emergencies,” OCHA Policy and Studies Series, Issue brief (2015)
17Currion, P. (2015), AidCoin: a revolution in humanitarian financing, Retrieved from: medium.com/@paulcurrion/introduction-513f86ed92df#.2dz4l3166
11

--- Page 12 ---
In Jordan, the World Food Program (WFP), launched 
a Blockchain based system called Building Blocks that 
helps support 10,000 Syrian refugees in the Azraq 
Camp. Refugees are given digital identities that they 
use to purchase items using biometrics since all their 
information is stored on the platform. Refugees who 
arrive during the night can purchase items by morning 
because the system can manage and process large 
volumes of transactions and information in seconds18. 
The International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent (IFRC) in collaboration with AID: 
Tech together with the Irish Red Cross (IRC) and 
Lebanese Red Cross piloted a Blockchain project in 
Tripoli, Aker Refugee Camp and Beirut. The project 
provided digital identities to 100 Syrian refugee 
families to allow them to use an electronic voucher 
to purchase commodities. The pilot was considered a 
success because families were able to purchase goods 
and services with ease and the IRC tracked the whole 
process in real time19. 
In India, the Akshaya Patra Foundation which is the 
largest non-governmental organisation (NGO) in the 
world that offers mid-day meals to school children, 
teamed up with Accenture Labs in 2017 to use 
Blockchain based technology, the Internet of Things 
(IoT), and artificial intelligence (AI), to improve their 
products, efficiency, and expansion. The Foundation 
feeds 1.7 million children from 14,173 schools 
traversing 12 Indian states20. Blockchain has helped 
the Foundation to increase the number of meals they 
provide and also increase their efficiency by reducing 
the time it takes to solve problems and avoid wastage.
In February 2018, UN Women, the UN Office of 
Information and Communication Technology (UN 
OICT) in collaboration with Innovation Norway, 
held a four-day workshop that brought together 
seven Blockchain Technology companies and other 
UN agencies, to find a way of using Blockchain 
based technologies to help address challenges 
faced by women and girls around the world. From 
the workshop, it was evident that, humanitarian aid 
organisations need to embrace new technologies to 
ensure that no one is left behind during crises21.
18http://innovation.wfp.org/project/building-blocks, retrieved in June 2018 
19http://media.ifrc.org/innovation/2017/01/04/using-blockchain-technology-to-assist-
refugees-in-lebanon, retrieved in June 2018
20https://www.akshayapatra.org
21http://www.unwomen.org/en/news/stories/2018/2/ retrieved in June 2018
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
12

--- Page 13 ---
1.3 Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to document the learnings 
from this pilot, inform the way forward for KRCS, 
and to explore the benefits and risks of Blockchain 
Technology in its operations. The findings from the 
pilot project will be shared with other humanitarian 
organisations, decision makers and Blockchain 
experts in different platforms with the aim of 
promoting knowledge, sharing experiences, and 
exploring further, the possibilities of Blockchain in 
humanitarian programming
The purpose of this 
study is to document 
the learnings from this 
pilot, inform the way 
forward for KRCS, and 
to explore the benefits 
and risks of Blockchain 
Technology in its 
operations.
13

--- Page 14 ---
Over the last decade, cash transfer programming 
(CTP) has increased due to its accountability and the 
dignity it gives to beneficiaries. CTP is a tool that uses 
money as a mode of intervention in a humanitarian 
crisis. Like all other methods of aid delivery and 
program implementation, there is constant change in 
methodology and implementation. This is inevitable 
because with time, the dynamics of disasters, donors 
and the international humanitarian world changes 
and programs need to be more efficient and effective 
without compromising the quality of work, delivery 
and impact.
KRCS has been using CTP for close to seven years 
as part of its emergency response. The strategic 
focus when it comes to CTP is in line with the global 
cash discussions that is centered on the need to 
upscale CTP using partnerships and innovations. 
Since the onset of CTP in 2011, KRCS has used 
different delivery mechanisms such as banks, mobile 
money and vendors. Banks and mobile money were 
preferred because they greatly reduced the risk of 
theft, diversion of funds and fraud through an audit 
2.0 The Pilot Project
trail that could be seen. Also, with the use of mobile 
money, people who were deemed unbankable can 
now transact money without having bank accounts.
In May 2018, KRCS in collaboration with IFRC 
conducted a Blockchain Open-Loop Cash Transfer 
pilot project in Isiolo County, Kenya. The primary 
focus of this project was to understand Blockchain 
Technology 
potential 
for 
transparency 
and 
accountability, which is important to the humanitarian 
sector. This was the first of its kind in the humanitarian 
sector, given that previously, the use of Blockchain 
Technology for cash transfers by humanitarian 
organisations has mostly used the closed-loop 
payment mechanisms such as e-vouchers, where 
payments are linked to merchants’ specifics outlets. 
In this case, Blockchain was explored to make CTP 
more effective, by promoting timely delivery of aid 
while strengthening transparency and accountability 
to beneficiaries and donors.
Other partners in the project included, RedRose who 
provided the cash data management platform, Craft 
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
14

--- Page 15 ---
Silicon Limited who were the Mpesa API integrator 
and Safaricom, the financial service provider. 
RedRose implemented a data management system 
integrated with Safaricom Mpesa mobile money 
and constructed a private Blockchain to record 
transactions.
...with the use of 
mobile money, people 
who were deemed 
unbankable can now 
transact money without 
having bank accounts.
15

--- Page 16 ---
   Figure 1: Steps involved in KRCS’ Cash transfer programming
3.1 The Approach
The usual KRCS CTP approach involves a minimum of nine steps as indicated in Figure 1. These 
steps include; stakeholder engagements at county and sub-county levels, community mobilisation, 
training of KRCS team, verification and validation of the beneficiary data, cash transfers, encashment 
monitoring, conducting post-distribution monitoring and carrying out after action review.
3.0 Results and Discussion
05
Integration between Blockchain 
and MPESA platforms
01
County Steering Group assess 
geographical targeting and 
development of beneﬁciary 
selection criteria for project.
02
Local administration and 
Community leaders review 
geographical targeted areas and 
selection criteria at the Sub 
County level.
03
Community mobilization by 
local leaders for sensitization on 
community based targeting, 
household proﬁling, registration 
and consent.
04
Conduct community review 
meetings to Verify/validate 
beneﬁciary data by KRCS and 
the Community; handling of 
complaints and feedback.
06
Beneﬁciaries receive cash 
through MPESA mobile money 
transfer platform/mechanism
KSH
07
Anonymous Transaction record-
ed in Blockchain to increase 
transparency and accountability
08
Conduct encashment monitor-
ing to ensure everyone received 
the entitled cash; handling of 
complaints and feedback.
KSH
09
Conduct Post Distribution 
Monitoring to understand 
output and impact for cash 
program
10
Carry out review of the pilot 
through an After Action Review 
process.
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
16

--- Page 17 ---
  Figure 2: A more responsive system developed for KRCS cash programme
The approach utilised in the pilot project included 
a combination of technologies that yielded a more 
responsive system for the KRCS cash program. Since 
the beneficiaries for the pilot project were already 
registered, their information was extracted from the 
KRCS KOBO data collection platform and uploaded 
to RedRose data management system.
The integrated system (Figure 2) included a mobile 
money network (Safaricom), an internal electronic 
funds transfer system (Craft Silicon), a humanitarian 
data management platform (RedRose) and an open-
source blockchain. Here, there was a segregation of 
duties between the fund requester and the finance 
manager who approves the disbursement. After 
approval by the finance manager, cash was disbursed 
to beneficiaries through Safaricom Mpesa. Once 
Safaricom received the payment requested and 
executed cash disbursement to the mobile wallets of 
beneficiaries, the transaction was recorded on the 
RedRose platform and the blockchain.
17

--- Page 18 ---
3.2 Successes
Transparency and accountability: 
The pilot project implemented a blockchain 
using multi-chains off-the-shelf solution by 
making use of its native algorithm to secure 
transaction data with cryptography, providing an 
immutable digital ledger. Here, four nodes were 
connected to blockchain allowing KRCS, IFRC, 
and RedRose to view the transactions, thus 
promoting transparency and accountability. 
In the current KRCS scenario, information for 
most projects is stored in different platforms 
so with blockchain this information becomes 
decentralized and every node (computer) in the 
chain is considered a gatekeeper making the 
information available and unchangeable.
In terms of data protection and privacy, very 
limited information and no personal information 
was recorded on the blockchain during the 
pilot project implementation. This was done to 
ensure data protected as the benefits and risks of 
Blockchain Technology were explored (Figure 3 
and 4).
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
18

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 4: Snapshot of a cash disbursement transactions 
to a beneficiary recorded in the blockchain
 
 
 
  Figure 3: Snapshot of transactions recorded in the blockchain
 Figure 4: Snapshot of a cash disbursement transactions to a beneficiary recorded in the blockchain
19

--- Page 20 ---
Efficiency: The KRCS CTP verification and 
validation process is ordinarily lengthy, sometimes 
taking up to three weeks depending on the 
geographical location where the project is being 
implemented. The verification and validation 
processes, the back and forth between volunteers in 
the field, staff in headquarters and partners such as 
Safaricom, are not only extended but in some cases 
get delayed due to unexpected circumstances such 
as flooded roads, beneficiaries’ migration and poor 
network coverage. This was not experienced during 
the pilot project, 2,090 beneficiaries received 
their money in three days after consent, proving 
that disbursement can be done efficiently and 
without affecting the quality of delivery. RedRose 
data management platform managed all aspects 
of the project cycle in just ten days while consent, 
disbursement and post-distribution monitoring was 
also accomplished proving that CTP delivery can be 
timely and up scaled.
Effectiveness: Automation of the Mpesa payment 
instructions and confirmation of the status of the 
transactions for reconciliation purposes made it easy 
for KRCS Finance Manager to disburse funds on the 
click of a button from the data management platform 
and view results of the transactions once a response 
from Mpesa was received. Previously, the beneficiary 
list was uploaded manually in to the Mpesa portal. 
This is also made possible by the widespread of mobile 
money networks in Kenya. In cases where money 
disbursed to the beneficiary’s account appeared 
inactive because Mpesa had frozen their accounts, 
KRCS was able to confirm beneficiary payments 
and accounts status immediately. This improved the 
quality of service allowing KRCS staff to explain to 
the beneficiaries why their funds appeared unusable.
Better 
auditability: 
The 
Blockchain 
Technology offered auditors an independent way of 
verifying a compiled list of transactions against the 
records produced by the individual systems such 
as RedRose or Mpesa, keeping each of the systems 
honest and increasing confidence in the programme. 
Any discrepancies with the data could help flag an 
investigation quickly. In reality, blockchain makes 
it harder to simply request the service provider to 
change the data. For example, when a disbursement 
is requested by mistake, it’s easy to call Mpesa and ask 
them to reverse the transaction. However, because of 
the integration with the data management platform 
and blockchain, the process of reversing a transaction 
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
20

--- Page 21 ---
must be orchestrated, so a record to update the data is 
reflected on the blockchain and to all the interacting 
systems. An auditor should be able to see the record 
for the original disbursement request and a separate 
record to correct that request.
Scalability: As one of the emerging technologies 
for CTP, Blockchain Technology has demonstrated 
its capacity to up scale in the last few years through 
proof of concept and use cases. Blockchain pilot in 
Lebanon (2015), was a closed-loop solution using 
barcoded vouchers for 100 households and all 
transactions were written on the blockchain. In 2017, 
the Akshaya Patra Foundation in India teamed up 
with Accenture Labs, the Internet of Things (IoT), 
and artificial intelligence (AI) to use blockchain, to 
improve their products, efficiency and expansion. 
They used data on the blockchain to increase the 
number of meals and change the operating systems. 
The KRCS pilot project is the only one in the world 
that used a open-loop solution with a large number 
(2100) of beneficiaries and proved that it was scalable.
The Blockchain 
Technology offered 
auditors an 
independent way of 
verifying a compiled 
list of transactions 
against the records 
produced by the 
individual systems such 
as RedRose or Mpesa...
21

--- Page 22 ---
Three features of the RedRose data solution that were essential 
to the success of the Pilot Project 
•	 It was based on open data kit (ODK) and worked offline. Power in Isiolo County was limited with frequent 
outages. Internet connection was afforded by Safaricom hotspots, which were cumbersome and slow. 
Being able to collect data offline and uploading it later when there was connectivity allowed the program to 
continue without disruptions. Beneficiary and transaction reports could also be download and used offline. 
Although not used in the Pilot, Red Rose’s mobile application for manual distribution also works offline and 
could add value to future KRCS programming where mobile money is not feasible.
•	 It integrates with financial service providers and other third parties through an application programming 
interface (API) allowing seamless communications between different platforms. This feature allowed KRCS 
to automate the distribution and reconciliation with M-PESA.
•	 It helped ensure high program quality by providing audit logs so that decisions and approvals were 
documented, segregating duties between the funds requester and the approver for financial controls, 
and providing an easy way to see who received what so donor funds could be tracked all the way down 
to beneficiary level. During the Pilot, the requester was an authorised programme staff member and the 
approver was a KRCS finance manager. Audit logs captured the steps, timestamp, and actors involved in the 
process for transparency.
It helped ensure high program quality by 
providing audit logs so that decisions and 
approvals were documented...
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
22

--- Page 23 ---
23

--- Page 24 ---
3.3 Lessons Learnt
•	 It is better to have several fit-for-purpose and 
easy to integrate technologies that fulfil required 
capabilities than a comprehensive system that is 
difficult and costly to change. The combination 
of a humanitarian data management platform, an 
internal electronic funds transfer system (EFT) 
and open source blockchain yielded a more 
responsive system for KRCS’ cash programme.
•	 Good collaboration and flexibility between the 
technology partners, KRCS and IFRC was also 
helpful in ensuring a successful project.
•	 Community trust is paramount especially in the 
consent getting process since it is still unclear 
how informed consent can be obtained from 
beneficiaries for projects involving complex data 
structures like Blockchain. For beneficiaries, 
the consent process was uncontroversial. 
Beneficiaries explained that they trusted KRCS 
and that this trust extended to its partners.
•	 Having a robust data management system 
significantly improved the KRCS processes, 
increasing efficiency in the delivery of assistance 
as well as improving the quality of programming. It 
promoted the segregation of duties and financial 
controls, auditability, and security of data. 
RedRose’s capabilities to work offline, ability 
to view up-to-date information on beneficiaries 
and assistance, and the ability to monitor data 
remotely increased KRCS’ responsiveness and 
quality of service.
•	 The Pilot Project demonstrated that Blockchain 
Technology can add value to CTP. By combining 
several fit for purpose technologies, the 
blockchain open-loop cash transfer Pilot Project 
offered greater transparency, accountability and 
responsiveness to beneficiaries.
•	 The process of obtaining consent for this 
project was not only meant to record explicit 
beneficiary consent for personal data processing, 
but it was also used to ensure that beneficiaries 
received communication on programme goals 
and objectives, how they will receive their cash 
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
24

--- Page 25 ---
assistance, and feedback and 
complaint mechanisms. The 
consent 
process 
was 
also 
used to verify the targeted 
beneficiaries 
by 
presenting 
their 
identification 
cards. 
These are fundamentals of 
good programming. Sharing 
information on how personal 
data will be used is also a 
requirement 
regardless 
of 
which legal basis is used.
Community trust is 
paramount especially 
in the consent getting 
process since it is still 
unclear how informed 
consent can be obtained 
from beneficiaries for 
projects involving complex 
data structures like 
Blockchain.
25

--- Page 26 ---
3.4 Challenges of Blockchain in Humanitarian Programming
•	 Blockchain Technology is Internet based and 
requires connectivity. In typical humanitarian 
environments where operations take place 
in difficult to access areas with limited to no 
Internet access or electricity, incorporating 
blockchain use should be designed to address 
these environmental constraints. For the 
Pilot Project, Blockchain complemented data 
collection and data management technology that 
worked offline.  Additionally, data stored in the 
Blockchain was timestamped but not expected to 
be updated in real time.
•	 The Pilot Project raised fundamental questions 
on consent and data privacy. Blockchain 
Technology is a complex data structure involving 
multiple stakeholders, which is still difficult 
for most to understand and it remains unclear 
how informed consent can be obtained from 
beneficiaries for projects involving complex data 
structures.
•	 Due to time constraints, very basic elements 
of how to generate, maintain and tracking 
transaction using digital identity was tested. The 
beneficiary profile was established in the RedRose 
data management platform and a RedRose 
beneficiary ID was assigned; on the blockchain, 
private and public keys were generated based on 
the RedRose beneficiary ID; transactions were 
written on the blockchain based on the public 
keys generated corresponding to beneficiaries. 
Thus, there is need to explore the use of digital 
identity generated by humanitarian organisations 
such as KRCS as alternatives to government 
identification cards.
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
26

--- Page 27 ---
Blockchain Technology is Internet based and 
requires connectivity...For the Pilot Project, 
Blockchain complemented data collection 
and data management technology that 
worked offline.  Additionally, data stored in the 
Blockchain was timestamped but not expected 
to be updated in real time.
27

--- Page 28 ---
4.1 Conclusion
As KRCS fulfils its commitment to scale up cash 
transfer programming (CTP), better ways of 
implementing and supporting its cash programmes 
are necessary. Innovative technologies such as 
blockchain offer new opportunities to address specific 
needs for CTP. The use of Blockchain Technology 
as an asset database is imperative, the paradigms of 
aid intervention are shifting and donors as well as 
beneficiaries are demanding for accountability and 
transparency. Through its unalterable distributed 
ledger, Blockchain Technology offers a way to 
improve transparency and accountability. When this 
is coupled with data management and integration with 
open-loop payments such as mobile money transfer, 
this technology not only enables efficient, timely 
disbursement of cash at scale but also assures controls 
and improves quality of service to beneficiaries.
The focus of this Pilot Project was to understand the 
potential of Blockchain Technology in transparency 
and 
accountability 
within 
the 
humanitarian 
sector. There are numerous opportunities that 
KRCS can explore using Blockchain Technology 
including the identification of funding gaps based 
on impact rather than institutional requirements, 
crowdfunding, and supply chain management. 
Other opportunities include cash-assistance, the 
use of smart contracts to secure forecast-based 
financing arrangements, volunteer and membership 
data management, the deployment of durable, self-
sovereign digital identifications, tracking of peer-to-
peer donations and payments and the potential use of 
cryptocurrencies. 
Is Blockchain Technology the game changer in 
humanitarian programming including CTP? Only 
more case studies from the implementation of 
humanitarian projects using blockchain technology 
will tell. One thing that is clear from this pilot study is 
that, it is all about the overall design of the ecosystem 
supporting a programme such as CTP and not a single 
technology that will have a lasting, transformative 
impact.
4.0 Conclusion and    
Recommendations
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
28

--- Page 29 ---
Is Blockchain Technology the game changer in 
humanitarian programming including CTP? Only 
more case studies from the implementation of 
humanitarian projects using blockchain technology 
will tell.
29

--- Page 30 ---
4.1 Recommendations
•	 For KRCS to fully implement Blockchain 
Technology in its programming, guidelines 
for safety and data sharing must be established. 
Best practices and guidance for using data 
responsibly must be adopted, which can then be 
used to develop a framework on how to use the 
blockchain responsibly. Questions about data 
privacy still need to be explored.
•	 Since Blockchain Technology is well suited 
to provide an additional layer of security and 
integrity to data from CTP, KRCS needs to 
explore more on the process, tools and skillset to 
audit data on blockchain by internal and external 
auditors for assurance.
•	 More research into the benefits, challenges and 
consequences of using Blockchain Technology 
should be pursued. Additional research and 
evidence is also required to translate these 
potential use cases to actual implementation.
•	 On issues surrounding consent and data privacy, 
KRCS in partnership with IFRC may need to 
build a robust protocol on the legal bases which 
includes, informed consent for using beneficiary 
data involving complex data architectures and 
contexts.
•	 To 
successfully 
implement 
Blockchain 
Technology within KRCS operations, a team 
drawn from different departments must be 
trained in the technology.
•	 Through different forums, reach out to 
policymakers, 
practitioners 
and 
other 
humanitarian partners to create awareness on 
the applicability of Blockchain Technology in the 
humanitarian sector.
•	 Conduct more collaborative work with other 
national partners, IFRC, the Government 
and private partners to ensure the scalability 
of Blockchain Technology. For example, a 
collaboration between Bitpesa (a Kenyan digital 
payment platform that helps people in the 
diaspora to send money to Kenya) and KRCS 
might help reach more Kenyans in the diaspora 
during fundraising 
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
30

--- Page 31 ---
•	 If the data transacted on the Blockchain 
is immutable, do people have the right 
or the ability to remove themselves from 
a Blockchain system?
•	 How 
can 
private 
and 
sensitive 
information such as gender, religion, 
and ethnicity be concealed from people 
who may intend to do harm?
•	 Who is accountable to ensure data 
privacy?
•	 In case of breach or abuse, what 
jurisdiction applies?
Frequently Asked Questions
31

--- Page 32 ---
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN HUMANITARIAN PROGRAMMING
32
South “C” (Bellevue) | Red Cross Road, Off Popo Road 
P.O. Box 40712, 00100-GPO, Nairobi, Kenya. 
Tel: (+254-20) 6003593/6002465/3950000 
Fax: (+254-20) 3950444 
Mobile: (+254) 703 037000/722 206958/733 333040
Email: info@icha.net | Website: www.icha.net
 South “C” (Bellevue) | Red Cross Road, Off Popo Road 
P.O. Box 40712, 00100-GPO, Nairobi, Kenya.
 Tel: (+254-20) 6003593/6002465/3950000 
Fax: (+254-20) 3950444 
 Mobile: (+254) 703 037000/722 206958/733 333040
Email: info@redcross.or.ke | Website: www.redcross.or.ke
