
--- Page 1 ---
Perspective
Blockchain humanitarianism and crypto-colonialism
Olivier Jutel1,*
1University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand
*Correspondence: olivier.jutel@otago.ac.nz
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2021.100422
SUMMARY
The humanitarian sector has emerged as a powerful mechanism of legitimation for blockchain technology.
Platform developers in the aid sector have been eager to showcase the promise of decentralization and en-
crypted blockchain data as the inheritance of the world’s poor and developing nations. This article claims that
humanitarian blockchain projects are inextricably linked to the politics of the crypto-economy, proprietary
platforms, and a class of solutionists championing Silicon Valley’s cultural values. Blockchain humanitarian-
ism has emerged through a private-public partnership (PPP) model in the non-governmental organization
(NGO) sector that embraces tech disruption and innovation. Ethically sound blockchain humanitarian pro-
jects are precluded by the inherent obscurantism of the technology, the inability to transpose blockchain’s
governance logic in the social realm, and inextricable ties to the political economy of cryptocurrencies. Pro-
jects in the developing world have thus embodied a colonial logic of techno-experimentation for platform de-
velopers and imbricate the NGO sector into the PR logic of blockchain solutionism.
INTRODUCTION
In May, blockchain visionary and Ethereum creator Vitalik
Buterin was lauded for making ‘‘one of the largest individual phil-
anthropic contributions ever’’;1 a 1.5 billion USD donation of
cryptocurrency toward India’s battle with COVID-19. It was a
gesture demonstrative of the legitimacy shell-game that en-
meshes crypto-speculators, blockchain humanitarians, and
techno-solutionist boosters. Buterin gifted the India Covid-
Crypto relief fund an assortment of cryptocurrencies including
50 trillion Shiba Inu coins (SHIBs). His possession of over $1
billion USD in SHIBs was a result of the coin’s creator, the pseu-
donymous Ryoshi, gifting Buterin a 50% stake in SHIB. As a
meme coin derived from the more well-known Dogecoin
(The co-founder of Dogecoin Jackson Palmer has recently
denounced his creation and the crypto-economy at large as
‘‘right-wing, hyper-capitalist technology’’.),2 SHIB and Buterin
are seemingly evincing a social proof of crypto’s power and hu-
manitarian idealism, no matter how risible this insular subculture.
This gesture of largesse also attempts to create a payment infra-
structure to work around an anticipated prohibition of cryptocur-
rencies in India. The donation also ensures a long stake and
increased liquidity in SHIB as the founder of the India Covid-
Crypto relief fund Sandeep Nailwal has pledged not to implode
the currency.3 What is consistent with the humanitarian block-
chain paradigm is a wedding of solutionist idealism with efforts
THE BIGGER PICTURE
A critical political economy approach to new technologies is key to discerning suit-
able use cases from highly ideological projects. This perspective considers the emergence of blockchain and
cryptocurrencies in the aid sector. The ability of blockchain enthusiasts to experiment with governance and
payment platforms in the developing world is a result of the ascendant private-public partnership (PPP)
model in the non-governmental organization (NGO) sector, which has increasingly aligned itself with Silicon
Valley’s cultural values. This overview of ﬂagship blockchain projects ﬁnds end-user solutions and outcomes
that principally serve a public-relations (PR) function for the broader crypto-economy and extend colonial
legacies of experimentation in the developing world. This paper argues that blockchain humanitarianism is
inseparable from crypto-colonialism as the developers, platforms, and rhetoric are interchangeable. A min-
imal requirement for an ethically sound blockchain humanitarian project would involve acknowledging the
risk and ideological extremism of crypto, the importance of developing world sovereignty, and the legacies
of colonialism through technological abstraction. The ethical failings of the PPP model in this case should be
read alongside the scholarship of Madianou and Nothias and point to the need for developing world platform
self-determination analogous to the Non-Aligned Movement’s call for a New World Information and Commu-
nication Order.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022 ª 2021 The Author.
1
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

--- Page 2 ---
to undermine the developing world’s ability to regulate this
radical technology, a concern for media hype and PR trium-
phalism over long-standing impacts, and the inseparability of
blockchain technology from the speculative economic logic of
cryptocurrencies.
This paper seeks to contextualize the emergence of block-
chain technology within the humanitarian sector as a product
of the broader political economy of cryptocurrencies and block-
chain platforms. Drawing on my own work in the Paciﬁc4 and a
brief outline of blockchain humanitarian applications and princi-
ples, I argue that these projects advance blockchain control and
the crypto-economy through the guise of humanitarianism. The
signiﬁcance of this is that the people and economies of the
developing world have become testing grounds for technologies
that undermine the independence of developing world countries,
continue colonial legacies of value extraction, and contribute to
the PR hype that is central to inﬂating cryptocurrencies. Block-
chain white papers and project reports consistently skirt the
questions of risk, technological and political suitability, and no-
tions of end-user empowerment that are context speciﬁc.
I turn ﬁrst to blockchain’s ‘‘treacherous vocabulary’’5 in
arguing that enthusiasts do not promote speciﬁc use cases so
much as the idea of blockchain as a new universal metaphor
for our networked future. Blockchain is thus a ‘‘digital teleology’’6
or universalist narrative premised on capturing all forms of social
value as immutable data. The claims to algorithmic governance
and pure mediation makes this technology obscurantist and
difﬁcult to untangle from rhetoric and ideology. Robert Herian
describes this as ‘‘the psycho-politics of blockchain’’ in which
a fear of the social and pathological distrust of the other is over-
come through this universal technological metaphor.7 He writes
that this technological faith is ‘‘replete with types of religiosity
and crytophoric symbolization that were once the preserve of
spiritual authorities but now intermingle economic and political
power.’’7 It is in this vein that Joe Lubin, founder of the block-
chain startup incubator ConsenSys, has described Buterin as
‘‘a genius alien that [has] arrived on this planet to deliver the
sacrosanct gift of decentralization.’’8
The presence of blockchain in the humanitarian sector is a
result of a neoliberal emphasis on public-private partnerships,
audit and procurement efﬁciencies, and the diminished role of
the developing world state in social provision. Neoliberalism is
a contested concept but can be broadly understood as the
privileging of the market and price signals over the public sector.
Blockchain advocates claim both the perfection of this market
logic through the tokenization of all value and a transcendence
of the state with concepts such as web3 or the metaverse.
What is characteristic about projects such as the World Food
Program’s Building Blocks and efforts in self-sovereign identity
(SSI) is a hedging on future use cases and the assumption that
more services will be absorbed by blockchain. While blockchain
humanitarian use cases might be modest in scale, rhetorically
they are essential in promoting the cultural values of Silicon Val-
ley. Experiments in disaster relief, digital identity, and gover-
nance may burnish the innovation credibility of aid agencies or
generate media hype for a particular blockchain. In this way, hu-
manitarian projects are inextricably linked to the grandiose pro-
nouncements and speculation of the broader crypto-economy
from El Salvador to Facebook’s Libra. In the case of Vanuatu,
Oxfam’s ﬂagship blockchain project operates alongside the
most dubious elements of crypto and against government at-
tempts to regulate in the public interest. Beyond experimentation
in the humanitarian sector, this technology has enabled neocolo-
nial land grabs and forms of platform control that seek to impose
blockchain as law in the developing world.
AN OBSCURANTIST PARADIGM
The central premise of blockchain technology is that the produc-
tion of encrypted, distributed, and immutable data is a universal
governance principle capable of solving all manner of social is-
sues. The digital ledger created by the Bitcoin blockchain serves
as the progenitor of this ideal. If one can cast aside the stag-
gering environmental impact, the failure of Bitcoin to function
for its purported purpose as money and the advent of a
crypto-oligarchy, or crypto ‘‘Whales,’’ more fraudulent than the
ﬁnancial system it intended to replace, then it can be said that
the Bitcoin blockchain functions well. (One of the more stunning
examples of the crypto economy’s failure is the stablecoin
Tether which was founded by Bitcoin Foundation president
Brock Pierce. In attempting to address crypto’s price stability
problem Tether issues coins that it claims are backed by the
equivalent USD, allowing users to lock in prices for crypto trans-
actions. In practice the issuance of $62 billion USD in Tether has
been a key driver in the surge of Bitcoin in 2020 and is the prin-
ciple source of crypto liquidity. An investigation by the New York
Attorney General’s ofﬁce has forced Tether to report that only
2.9% of its reserves are cash creating an excessive leverage sit-
uation worse than Lehman Brothers.9) Bitcoin miners are
economically incentivized to create the immutable record of
every bitcoin transaction through the energy intensive encryption
protocol referred to as ‘‘Proof of Work.’’ The entirety of this uni-
verse is well-represented by the blockchain up until the point a
crypto-exchange is hacked or a fallout within the community
leads to a ‘‘fork’’ in the blockchain. While a narrow technological
success, bitcoin and blockchain are better thought of as ‘‘politics
masquerading as technology.’’10 The ideal of subjects enriched
by a God vista of data and freed from mediating institutions re-
mains the last utopian narrative of the digital in the current
‘‘Techlash.’’ For the converted, sending Dogecoin ‘‘to the
moon’’ or other meme-fueled speculative rushes into crypto
functions as a social proof of blockchain’s revolutionary status.
These ideals have migrated to governance platforms through
Buterin’s Ethereum blockchain. Buterin’s innovation was to
allow any developer to launch other coins or digital applications
on Ethereum. While this has largely meant the proliferation of
crypto pump-and-dump schemes, the dream of smart con-
tracts, digital autonomous organizations, and ‘‘a technical
agency separate from the messiness of society and the
economy’’ 11 resides in Ethereum. Ethereum co-founder Joe Lu-
bin is the emissary of blockchain governance, having created the
blockchain company and start-up incubator ConsenSys. Lubin
professes faith in a ﬂourishing of human creativity through the
blockchain ‘‘tokenization of everything.’’12 Behind the cyber-uto-
pian rhetoric of disintermediation, decentralization and SSI are
problems associated with the highly mutable nature of block-
chain values and language. Blockchain is a sectarian space
with rival platforms and communities vying to become the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
2
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
Perspective

--- Page 3 ---
standard bearer. A lack of standardization means competing
factions are often clear about the shortcomings of a rival block-
chain not living up to the principles of ‘‘Satoshi’s Vision.’’ (Of note
here is BSV or Bitcoin Satoshi Vision which was a fork from the
Bitcoin blockchain in 2018 ostensibly aimed at scaling block-
chain with larger blocks of data. Its founder Craig Wright has
claimed to be Bitcoin’s creator, the anonymous Satoshi Nako-
moto, which provoked what is known as the ‘‘Bitcoin civil
war.’’) Attempting to transpose algorithmic consensus protocols
onto governance questions that exceed the discreet units and
transactions of cryptocurrencies means that the blockchain met-
aphor is highly contested and open to competing interpretations.
Blockchain can be thought of as an obscurantist paradigm in
which a purity of purpose overrides the necessity for design
grounded in an understanding of existing human systems.
The problems with implementation become self-evident in the
need for a less wasteful consensus algorithm. Where Bitcoin re-
wards computational power and energy consumption, Ether-
eum’s Proof of Stake and Proof of Authority bestow upon coin/
token holders the authority to validate transactions. This repre-
sents a formalization of the centralized class power that under-
girds blockchain. One can make abstract arguments about
staking and tokenizing different forms of value, but the power
of Whales and platform developers trumps any notion of a block-
chain-decentralized community. This proposed alternative to the
environmental cost of Proof of Work has not scaled and works
only within private, centralized blockchains. Buterin’s much-
touted Ethereum 2.0 remains ‘‘18 months away,’’ a horizon
that David Gerard points out has been invoked consistently since
2014.13 That does not stop blockchain enthusiasts from making
claims to immutable truth often by lobbying governments to lend
their power and legal imprimatur. From El Salvador’s recognition
of crypto as legal tender, Arizona’s Electronic Transaction Act
declaring blockchain ‘‘uncensored truth,’’5 or the various memo-
randums of understanding (MOUs) signed between developing
world countries and developers; this grand technology of disin-
termediation attempts to reconcile its contradictions through
the power and legal imprimatur of the state, NGOs, and suprana-
tional institutions.
BLOCKCHAIN HUMANITARIANISM AND NEOLIBERAL
GOVERNANCE
Blockchain humanitarian projects and partnerships with aid
agencies have been a critical means of conferring legitimacy
upon the claims of blockchain boosters. The technology’s emer-
gence in this space is symptomatic of a neoliberal aid model that
embraces PPPs, touts digital technologies under the rubric of efﬁ-
ciency, and creates competition incentives for project funding.14
Conceptions of ethical best practices for blockchain and other
emerging technologies operate within these core principles of
competitiveprocurement,auditculture,and transparency.Inaddi-
tion to these governance principles, digital technologies are also
synonymous with the rhetoric of individual empowerment and
the ability to ‘‘correct the asymmetries on which humanitarianism
is based.’’14 Blockchain advocates have positioned their projects
as responsive to these imperatives and the humanitarian
ethical best practices of ‘‘humanity, neutrality, impartiality, inde-
pendence . [and] dignity.’’15 Furthermore, blockchain’s transfor-
mational power is seen going beyond moribund and unresponsive
bureaucracies, whether for the developing world state or tradi-
tional aid. A report from the Overseas Development Institute, a
European tech-humanitarian advocacy group, claims that the
problems with inequities in aid lie in too limited an application of
blockchain. This is a problem of blockchain projects ‘‘adopt[ing]
a reformative, rather than transformative, approach . reproduc-
ing many of the underlying power dynamics, hierarchical struc-
tures, funding ﬂows, and deployment strategies that already exist
in traditional humanitarianism.’’16 Blockchain thus represents the
height of the market-led neoliberal approach to the development
sector while presenting itself as a transcendent technology of
empowerment.
The most high-proﬁle application of blockchain in this manner
is the World Food Program’s (WFP) Building Blocks. It is a project
hatched in the WFP’s Innovation Accelerator that embraces the
PPP model and Silicon Valley mantras in its branding: ‘‘Innova-
tion to #DisruptHunger.’’17 The program centers on an Ethereum
software platform for cash aid developed inside a Syrian refugee
camp and is the ‘‘largest implementation of blockchain technol-
ogy for humanitarian aid in the world.’’18 Recipients submit to a
retinal scan, which functions as a unique digital identity analo-
gous to a bitcoin wallet from which they can access a balance
and make and receive payments. I will return to the ethical ques-
tions of biometrics and digital identity, but ﬁrst, the contours of
the blockchain are notable. As a private and permissioned sys-
tem, this is the epitome of a database masquerading as a block-
chain. There is no mining or consensus algorithm, and by the
WFP’s own admission, scaling into an actual blockchain remains
a speculative horizon dependent on the participation of other in-
stitutions. UN Women has launched a pilot on Building Blocks
and concludes the unrealized potential of blockchain serves
‘‘as a stepping-stone towards broader collaboration within the
humanitarian cash ecosystem.’’19 In this way, aid recipients are
not the liberated subjects of blockchain so much as the test sub-
jects for enterprise software that ﬁts the innovation rubric. The
watchword of innovation pushes the ethical premises of tech-hu-
manitarianism and PPPs to absurdity in the case of the WFP’s
partnership with the CIA-funded American national security
contractor Palantir, notorious for its lack of transparency.20
Thus, blockchain’s governance ideal of immutable data creates
technological affordances to entrenched geopolitical interests,
bureaucratic intermediaries, and the shadowy world of private
intelligence to survey and intervene in conﬂict zones and the
developing world.
Despite these shortcomings, the aid sector continues to
champion one of the more grandiose ideas of blockchain, SSI.
SSI has been the central metaphor of the blockchain-liberated
subject immersed in web3, able to leave the state and mediating
institutions behind. Blockchain and SSI have ﬁgured prominently
among the solutions for digital identity in the developing world
despite being ‘‘a ﬂexible and ambiguous concept.’’21 What the
scaling up and integration of projects like Building Blocks prom-
ise is a ﬂexible governance system that can use algorithmic trust
as a workaround to perceived developing world dysfunction or
institutional weakness. Refugees are seen as the chief beneﬁ-
ciaries of a system of portable identity, stored on the blockchain,
that includes biometrics, ofﬁcial documents, and social media
data. As Joe Lubin puts it in explicitly cyber-libertarian terms,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
3
Perspective

--- Page 4 ---
the self-sovereign is ‘‘less enthralled to their governments and
less subject to adverse situations . if someone is ejected
from their country . they can reconstitute their life.’’22 This
narrative of digital refuge has been invoked by crypto-advocates
with the recent American withdrawal from Kabul resulting in Af-
ghans ‘‘embark[ing] on an arduous and dangerous escape’’
with Bitcoin allowing the ‘‘transfer [of] whatever wealth they
have
across
borders.’’
(The
champion
of
blockchain
in
Afghanistan and the subject of this Coin Desk article is Roya
Mahboob. Mahboob has been seen as an exemplary ﬁgure of
private sector techno-humanitarianism and was named to the
TIME 100, with an entry written by Sheryl Sandberg, for her
championing of women’s digital education. She is also an
ambassador
for the Global
Blockchain
Business Council
(GBBC) and coach of the Afghan women’s robotics team. Her
team’s success in Estonia ‘‘was in part paid for with a bitcoin
award that Mahboob had earned earlier that year at the annual
Blockchain Summit on Necker Island.’’ The role of Richard Bran-
son and the politics of the GBBC’s blockchain humanitarianism
will be discussed further along.)23 Circumventing the developing
world state through individual digital rights may represent
mobility for some, while for others it will mean the ability of the
global North to replace universal rights with digital risk assess-
ment and the ‘‘segregation of the global population into relatively
closed groups of varying value.’’24 The ongoing discussions
around non-proprietary standards for SSI, on or off chain func-
tionality, does little to change the contours of a tech-humanitar-
ianism that allows blockchain developers to extract value from
the global South.
SOLUTIONISM, PR, AND THE AID SECTOR
Blockchain developers are to able take advantage of the most
ethically suspect aspects of the PPP aid model through maxi-
malist rhetoric and the PR logic that bind crypto and blockchain
humanitarianism. The claims of crypto and blockchain advo-
cates are interchangeable as a universal governance infrastruc-
ture that lowers and equalizes the cost of ﬁnancial and digital
inclusion. The WFP conﬂate crypto and blockchain humanitari-
anism in citing among their press clippings for Building Blocks
the article ‘‘Transforming the Social Sector: Bitcoin and Block-
chain for Good.’’25 With a seeming critique of ﬁnancial elitism,
advocates have presented crypto as a progressive and human-
itarian cause with the rallying cry of ‘‘banking the unbanked.’’
Blockchain’s public relations and institutional apparatuses,
whether the Bitcoin Foundation, Global Blockchain Business
Council, or the MIT Media Lab Digital Currency Initiative, empha-
size this notion that the principle beneﬁciaries of decentralization
will be the world’s poor. When Facebook announced Libra (now
Diem), the digital payment system nominally backed by a block-
chain, the promotional materials offered visually lush representa-
tions of the developing world and the promise of inviting
everybody ‘‘to the global economy with the same ﬁnancial
opportunities.’’26 In more ﬂamboyant terms, the director Spike
Lee, in his video for CoinCloud entitled ‘‘Old Money is Out,
New Money is in,’’ offers a funk-infused celebration of diversity
and bitcoin ATMs. He describes crypto as ‘‘positive, inclusive,
ﬂuid, strong, culturally rich’’27 in contrast to Fiat currency’s
exploitative character. The language of rebellion, iconoclasm,
and anarcho-capitalism are never far from the surface even in
the policy documents of Oxfam that describe cryptocurrencies
as ‘‘retalia[tion]’’ for the ﬁnancial crisis ‘‘with a digital currency
believed to be impervious to unpredictable monetary policies
or political inﬂuence.’’28
The intertwining of crypto’s PR logic and notions of economic
development, social justice, and humanitarianism in blockchain
discourse owes to its status as a ‘‘techno-solution’’ 29 par excel-
lence. Solutionism is the view that human systems can and
should be perfected through the mandates of computation and
the privileged class of technologists, programmers, and tech-
capitalists who wield these universal skills. In the case of
blockchain, data encryption and decentralization are universal
principles that can solve human governance systems through
self-executing code. There is no better proving ground for block-
chain than the aid and NGO sectors, which increasingly avail
themselves to solutionist experimentation through the PPP
model. A combination of platform ‘‘philanthropy’’30 and the inter-
ventions of the US State Department with initiatives such as
‘‘Civil Society 2.0’’ and ‘‘Tech Camp’’31 are crucial in creating a
vision of social empowerment and transformation through Sili-
con Valley platforms. Hackathons, solutionist innovation, and
performative entrepreneurialism have become ideals in this
space, which encourages a blurring of boundaries between the
goals of NGOs and platform developers. Developers are able
to access funding streams for projects that boost the humanitar-
ian cred of platforms and generate PR around potential proof of
concept, while the embrace of solutionism for NGO workers
may serve as a ‘‘rehearsal for future employment, partnerships,
or investments.’’32
Oxfam’s ‘‘Unblocked Cash’’ disaster relief blockchain is
exemplary of this NGO solutionism. The program saw the launch
of an ‘‘Oxlabs’’ innovation hub, which, like WFP’s Innovation
Accelerator, is styled on the values of Silicon Valley disruption
and
bringing
together
developers
such
as
Sempo
and
ConsenSys. Oxfam’s project leader Sandra Uwtange Hart exem-
pliﬁes the ﬂuidity of PPP and solutionist space, serving as an
ambassador for the international advocacy group the Global
Blockchain Business Council before becoming the CEO for
Emerging Impact, a consultancy ﬁrm centered on decentralized
ﬁnancial services (DeFi) for the developing world. DeFi is a
radical vision of a crypto ﬁnancial system based on Ethereum ap-
plications and contracts, which allows participants to loan crypto
and access credit and investments with astoundingly high inter-
est rates. Key safeguards from traditional ﬁnance such as depo-
sit insurance and know-your-customer rules do not apply, and
DeFi systems are ‘‘plagued by hacks, fraud’’33 and account
freezes. Presenting this as a solution to the unbanked of the
developing world is highly ideological, presents intolerable risk,
and lays bare the spurious distinctions between blockchain hu-
manitarianism and crypto.
The upselling of Unblocked Cash further dulls the distinctions
between technological use cases and the public relations logic at
the heart of blockchain solutionism. The plaudits and funding
Unblocked Cash secured with the EU’s ‘‘Blockchain for Social
Good’’34 prize features prominently in the self-narrativizing of
Emerging Impact, Oxfam, and Sempo. Oxfam’s presentation
to the EU Innovation Council is demonstrative of the way solu-
tionism comes to mirror the performative style of a venture
ll
OPEN ACCESS
4
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
Perspective

--- Page 5 ---
capital pitch. Oxfam declares Unblocked Cash a scaleable solu-
tion, stating, ‘‘we have the market, we have the network, we have
the partners, we have the expertise.’’35 The project has also
garnered attention for Sempo in Wired magazine as a solution
to the problem of distributing stimulus checks during the COVID
pandemic.36 While the ethical issues between capital, technol-
ogy, and philanthropy are not exclusive to blockchain, it is a plat-
form uniquely suited to the self-reinforcing cycles of solutionist
hype regardless of project suitability (more on this below). As
Gerard writes of Libra, the impetus may well be genuine but
can only serve to cast problems and solutions in terms venture
capitalists, tech developers, and crypto-billionaires under-
stand.37 These imperial class politics become undeniable in
the form of the Global Blockchain Business Council, which
boasts having been conceived on Richard Branson’s Necker Is-
land and launched at Davos.38
BLOCKCHAIN COLONIALISM
Blockchain colonialism in the developing world advances with
a humanitarian face, taking advantage of a desire for techno-
logical
development
and
a
regulatory
weakness
among
developing world governments. Promises of technological
leapfrogging and leading the charge toward a trillion-dollar dig-
ital revolution appear as attractive alternatives to colonial leg-
acies of dependence and the exploitation of natural resources.
The exuberance of developers in the Paciﬁc has led to claims
that indigenous societies are ‘‘naturally decentralized’’39 and
uniquely positioned to develop the blockchain with ‘‘alternative
economies and governance systems . deeply ingrained in our
culture.’’40 In the developing world, blockchain advocates wield
a narrative of authentic indigenous and blockchain values un-
corrupted by mediating institutions. Shane Ninai of Papua
New Guinea and Ledger Atlas has spoken of shell money as
analogous to ‘‘proof of work’’ and communal structures as a
‘‘consensus algorithm.’’41 In the Marshall Islands, a national
cryptocurrency was touted by leaders as ‘‘manifesting our na-
tional liberty’’ and marking them as the ‘‘ﬁrst nation to adopt a
transparent crypto monetary system.’’42 The impetus to plant
the blockchain ﬂag among developers and governments imbri-
cates them in the logic of solutionist PR and blockchain trium-
phalism. In the case of El Salvador’s president Nayib Bukele,
his efforts in granting Bitcoin the status of legal tender has
made him part of the crypto-elite, wielding the ‘‘aspirational
chaos of cryptocurrency’’43 as a governance strategy to
compensate for democratic deﬁcits. (A poll conducted by
Francisco Gavidia University of Salvadoreans found popular
sentiment regarding the legal implementation of Bitcoin as legal
tender overwhelming negative with 49% of respondents ex-
pressing ‘‘Uncertainty,’’ 29% ‘‘Fear’’ compared to 20% as
‘‘Optimistic.’’)44
The rollout of blockchain and other vanguard technologies in
the developing world trace colonial histories, power imbalances,
and the advance of western capital through technological
abstraction. Madianou has described techno-solutionism in the
aid sector as shifting ‘‘the risks of experimentation . to some
of the most fragile environments in the world with value extracted
for the beneﬁt of stakeholders including private entrepreneurs
and large companies.’’45 The speculative logic of blockchain
colonialism is evident in an extraordinary MOU between the gov-
ernment of Papua New Guinea and Ledger Atlas, a Delaware-
registered company backed by Silicon Valley venture capitalist,
billionaire, and Bitcoin evangelist Tim Draper. The MOU sought
to establish a blockchain ‘‘extraterritorial’’ special economic
zone with Ledger Atlas acting as an ‘‘independent stand-alone
administrative entity speciﬁcally constituted for regulating and
administering the economic zone under the stewardship of Led-
ger Atlas inc.’’46 Draper announced the project to a crowd gath-
ered outside of Draper University in San Mateo, California,
declaring the creation of a ‘‘virtual governance platform’’ using
bitcoin and blockchain to serve as a ‘‘model for all governments
in the world for the next ﬁfty years.’’47 While this agreement has
yielded no tangible output, and the Ledger Atlas URL has since
lapsed, it demonstrates the blockchain shell games of legiti-
mation that leverage solutionism, tech-development, and the
legal imprimatur of the state to obscure blockchain colonialism.
The audacious failure of Ledger Atlas in PNG may appear as
an excess of tech-capitalist hubris; however, it highlights the
inseparability of ‘‘humanitarian’’ blockchain from proprietary
platforms and design principles transposed from the private
sector that lack context-speciﬁc knowledge suitable to devel-
oping world societies.15 In Vanuatu, Oxfam’s aforementioned
Unblocked Cash has been one of the ﬂagship humanitarian
blockchain projects unfolding alongside the most unseemly ele-
ments of the crypto-economy. Vanuatu’s status as a tax haven
with citizenship-by-investment has made it a hub for wealth pro-
tection, crypto scams, and libertarian fantasies of a tax-free
island paradise. Vanuatu made headlines in the international
business press with the shadowy businessman and govern-
ment-approved passport broker Geoffrey Bond selling citizen-
ship via Bitcoin.48 Bond would also go on to purchase land for
a resort in Vanuatu with Sebastien Greenwood,49 the indicted
co-founder of Onecoin, a cryptocurrency-style Ponzi/multi-level
marketing (MLM) scheme that defrauded users of billions, partic-
ularly in the developing world. Vanuatu has also provided citizen-
ship for the creators of the billion-dollar scam Africrypt,50 and the
sale of Vanuatu’s Paciﬁc Private Bank allowed the Lithuanian
cryptocurrency Bankera to acquire a bank license, something
denied to them in their home country.51 From its Vanuatu foot-
hold, Bankera claimed to be a blockchain-driven digital bank
and raised $150 million in what amounted to a conventional
pump-and-dump initial coin offering with its value collapsing
almost immediately.52 These developments were unwelcome
in light of the Vanuatu government’s efforts to comply with the
Financial Action Task Force’s anti-money-laundering standards.
In response, the Reserve Bank of Vanuatu issued a statement
‘‘strongly advising all corporate, ﬁnancial institutions, public en-
terprises, and individual customers and public at large to refrain
from involving themselves in Bitcoin.’’53
A minimum requirement of any ethically sound humanitarian
blockchain project should be to address the context of crypto’s
highly speculative and techno-colonial logic as well as acknowl-
edge the importance of Vanuatu’s economic sovereignty. These
are distinctions that blockchain humanitarian projects fail to
address, as they are imbricated in the solutionist hype machine
that serves other priorities. Unblocked Cash’s self-reporting is
laudatory, and my research beneﬁts greatly from it, but it under-
scores the inseparability of these paradigms and a solutionist
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
5
Perspective

--- Page 6 ---
myopia that evades ‘‘the rationale for choosing blockchain plat-
forms.’’15 The project centers on cash aid in disaster response,
with recipients receiving preloaded near-ﬁeld communication
(NFC) cards with DAI-stable coins and approved vendors and
distributers using smart phones to clear transactions and feed
back information to Oxfam. Oxfam credits the system with
‘‘modest cost-savings and signiﬁcant time-savings’’28 while
acknowledging difﬁculties with user literacy and the highly
centralized nature of the blockchain in which the core developer
‘‘represents a single point of failure.’’15 What is characteristic of
humanitarian and blockchain governance projects is how princi-
ples of disintermediation fail or are abandoned when confronting
the reality of network infrastructure and social systems. NFC
cards help to work around connectivity issues but do not allow
end-users to have ‘‘access or the literacy to comprehend the in-
formation stored on the network.’’28 Its an end-user outcome
that begins with the unexamined premise of blockchain solution-
ism that ends up functioning as a private database.
A crucial ﬁnding in their reporting on Unblocked Cash was that
‘‘disintermediation was undermined by the reliance on incum-
bent Financial Service Providers related to unforeseen complex-
ities of actors cashing out of the system.’’28 Put simply, cash was
a necessary mediator in this project for vendors as a result of the
Reserve Bank’s crypto prohibition. However, this key regulatory
framework and its political context go completely unacknowl-
edged, and the subsequent recommendation ‘‘is to encourage
vendors to exchange their DAI for ﬁat currency through third-
party exchanges such as Binance . remov[ing] the reliance on
incumbent ﬁnancial institutions.’’28 For the greater universal
good of disintermediation, Oxfam shows blithe disregard of the
Reserve Bank’s policy and declaration of ‘‘Vatu currency as
the sole legal tender in the country,’’53 calling instead for a migra-
tion to the vanguard institutions of crypto, namely crypto-ex-
changes. Binance is a strikingly reckless recommendation, as
the exchange has been banned in major markets54 and
holds the largest stake in Tether,55 bringing with it the very likely
risk of illiquidity. Such a recommendation can only be counte-
nanced by a solutionist ignorance of crypto-politics or a desire
to transform developing world governance over all else. As Ox-
fam takes this program to Papua New Guinea, solutionist
exuberance and speculation will continue to be deﬁning features
of blockchain humanitarianism.
CONCLUSION
The failings of blockchain humanitarian projects owe to an
inability to operate outside the solutionist PR machinery and
the broader crypto-economy central to this technological para-
digm. The partnerships between blockchain platform devel-
opers, NGOs, and developing world governments invest all
parties in the same PPP disruption model that champions Silicon
Valley solutionism. For blockchain developers and evangelists,
humanitarian headlines and aspirations are crucial to deﬂecting
questions about environmental costs, immense concentrations
of wealth, and crypto’s role in enabling all manner of criminal
activity. Blockchain’s humanitarianism offers a redemptive
trajectory in the face of the current techlash, as IBM’s ‘‘Dear
Tech’’ apology campaign puts it: ‘‘let’s use blockchain to help
reduce poverty.’’56 The emphasis has changed from explicitly
crypto-radicalism, but the platforms, key movers, and valoriza-
tion through PR remain the same. Governance blockchain’s
lack of standardization, technical shortcomings, and new
intermediating layers derive from the fact that claims to data
immutability and consensus algorithms cannot be replicated in
complex social systems. While there may be rancor within this
paradigm, solutionism ensures a lack of self-awareness, as all
parties are invested in their own claim to proof of concept and
their purity of purpose. Scammers, evangelists, and humanitar-
ians are interchangeable in this space. Forcefully confronting
the techno-colonialism of Bitcoin Foundation president Brock
Pierce, Silicon Valley scion Tim Draper or the Ethereum Whales
Vitalik Buterin and Joe Lubin cuts against the interests of the sol-
utionist class. Within these political economic contours, the
prospects for a blockchain humanitarianism able to address
the ethical concerns around experimentation and platform spec-
ulation appear slim.
Beyond this kind of speculation, it is worth considering brieﬂy
the explicitly colonial objectives of organizing bodies and advo-
cacy groups such as the GBBC. Blockchain governance pro-
jects function as tools of digital cartography for developing
world markets and for the extraction of value. The champion
of this blockchain development paradigm is Hernando de
Soto, principal economist on the GBBC board of directors,
long-time political ally and advisor to the far-right Fujimori po-
litical dynasty in Peru, and a key ﬁgure in forging the so-called
‘‘Washington Consensus’’ of property rights and market re-
forms in the developing world. de Soto has championed block-
chain as a means to ‘‘end poverty’’ by bringing ‘‘undeveloped
assets and resources worth $170 trillion’’ into the global market
via a ‘‘single computer platform [that], can share the blessings
of private-property registration with the whole world.’’57 The in-
clusion of these resources through ‘‘organized knowledge
about the location of every visible asset on earth’’28 serves to
undermine the developing world state and precludes non-mar-
ket conceptions of value. In Fiji, where 90% of lands have re-
mained under indigenous control as a result of the anti-colonial
struggle against the British,58 this digital cartography is unfold-
ing under the auspices of the Asian Development Bank. A
blockchain land registry, which builds in banks, insurance,
and investment agencies as permissioned stakeholders59 in
indigenous land tenders, has been key in efforts to rationalize
land use under the rubric of the market. This prizing open of
Fijian lands for appraisal and the streamlining of leases has
provoked recent political unrest60 and the sense that tools of
technological and market abstraction threaten indigenous sov-
ereignty. Viewed in this way, blockchain humanitarianism is not
simply the human face of the crypto-economy but an intensiﬁ-
cation of the South-to-North extraction of value via solutionism
and blockchain platforms.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The author declares no competing interests.
INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY
While citing references scientiﬁcally relevant for this work, we also actively
worked to promote gender balance in our reference list.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
6
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
Perspective

--- Page 7 ---
REFERENCES
1. Sankaran,
V. (2021). Ethereum Co-founder
and Crypto
Billionaire
Donates $1bn to India Covid Fight – and Currency Instantly Plummets
(Independent). https://www.independent.co.uk/asia/india/ethereum-
founder-vitalik-buterin-cryptocurrency-b1847042.html.
2. Locke, T. (2021). The Co-creator of Dogecoin Explains Why He Doesn’t
Plan to Return to Crypto. CNBC https://www.cnbc.com/2021/07/14/
dogecoin-co-creator-jackson-palmer-criticizes-the-crypto-industry.html.
3. Sriram, M. (2021). A Billionaire Donated Crypto Meme Tokens Worth $1
Billion to India. It May Just be Worth $50 Million – Here’s Why. Money
Control
https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/a-billionaire-
donated-crypto-meme-tokens-worth-1-billion-to-india-it-may-just-be-
worth-50-million-heres-why-6890501.html.
4. Jutel, O. (2021). Blockchain imperialism in the paciﬁc. Big Data Soc.
8, 1–14.
5. Walch, A. (2017). Blockchain’s treacherous vocabulary: one more chal-
lenge for regulators. J. Internet L. 21, 9–16.
6. Jutel, O. (2020). Blockchain, affect and digital teleologies. In Affective Pol-
itics of Digital Media, M. Boler and E. Davis, eds. (Routledge), pp. 101–115.
7. Herian, R. (2019). Regulating Blockchain. Routledge, 140.
8. Peck, M. (2016). The Uncanny Mind That Built Ethereum. Wired https://
www.wired.com/2016/06/the-uncanny-mind-that-built-ethereum/.
9. Tether. (2021). Tether Releases Breakdown of its Reserves. March 31.
https://tether.to/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/tether-march-31-2021-
reserves-breakdown.pdf.
10. Golumbia, D. (2015). Bitcoin as politics: distributed right-wing extremism.
In Moneylab Reader, G. Lovink, N. Tkacz, and P. De Vries, eds. (Institute of
Network Cultures), p. 118.
11. Zook, M.A., and Blankenship, J. (2018). New spaces of disruption? The
failures of bitcoin and the rhetorical power of algorithmic governance.
Geoforum 96, 253.
12. Lubin, J. (2019). Highlight’s from Joe Lubin’s Ethereal NY Keynote 2019.
(ConsenSys
Media).
https://media.consensys.net/highlights-from-joe-
lubins-ethereal-ny-keynote-2019-7683c65d6d95.
13. Noone, G. (2021). Bitcoin and the Environment: Crypto’s Uncertain Future.
(Tech Monitor). https://techmonitor.ai/leadership/sustainability/bitcoin-
and-the-environment.
14. Madianou, M. (2021). Nonhuman humanitarianism: when ‘AI for good’ can
be harmful. Inf. Commun. Soc. 24, 850–868.
15. Baharmand, H., Saaed, N., Comes, T., and Lauras, M. (2021). Developing
a framework for designing humanitarian blockchain projects. Comput. In-
dustry 131, 103487.
16. Coppi, G., and Fast, L. (2019). Blockchain and Distributed Ledger
Technologiesd in the Humanitarian Sector. (Humanitarian Policy Group
Commissioned
Report).
https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/
193658/1/1067430997.pdf.
17. World Food Programme (2021). Innovation accelerator. https://innovation.
wfp.org.
18. Wang, F., and De Filippi, P. (2020). Self-sovereign Identity in a Globalized
World: Credentials-Based Identity Systems as a Driver for Economic Inclu-
sion. (Frontiers in Blockchain). https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fbloc.2019.00028/full.
19. U.N. Women (2021). UN women-WFP blockchain pilot project for cash
transfers in refugee camps. https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/ﬁles/
resources/un%20women-wfp%20blockchain%20pilot%20project%
20for%20cash%20transfers%20in%20refugee%20camps%20jordan%
20case%20study.pdf.
20. Responsible Data (2019). Open letter to WFP re: palantir agreement.
https://responsibledata.io/2019/02/08/open-letter-to-wfp-re-palantir-
agreement/.
21. Cheesman, M., and Slavin, A. (2021). Self-sovereign identity and forced
migration: slippery terms and the refugee data apparatus. In Digital
Identity, Virtual Borders and Social Media, E. Korkmaz, ed. (Edward Elgar
Publishing).
22. Stanley, A. (2017). US State Department Seeks Blockchain Boost
amid
$10 Billion
Reboot.
(Coin
Desk). https://www.coindesk.com/
markets/2017/10/12/us-state-department-seeks-blockchain-boost-amid-
10-billion-reboot/.
23. Casey, M. (2021). Money Reimagined: Afghan Activist Roya Mahboob
on Crypto. Coin Desk https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2021/08/20/
money-reimagined-afghan-activist-roya-mahboob-on-crypto/.
24. Gstrein, O.J., and Kochenov, D. (2020). Digital identity and distributed led-
ger technology: paving the way to a neo-feudal brave new world? Front.
Blockchain 10, 17.
25. World Food Programme (2021). Building Blocks: Innovation for Zero Hun-
ger. (Innovation Accelerator). https://innovation.wfp.org/project/building-
blocks.
26. Jutel, O. (2021). Facebook Libra Cryptocurrency Ad. (YouTube). https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ILDQ3xa4uGQ.
27. Coincloud (2021). The Currency of Currency – Directed by Spike Lee.
(YouTube). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5XMFEUNut18.
28. Rust, B. (2019). Unblocked Cash: Piloting Accelerated Cash Transfer
Delivery in Vanuatu. (Oxfam). https://oxfamilibrary.openrepository.com/
bitstream/handle/10546/620926/rr-unblocked-cash-delivery-vanuatu-
311019-en.pdf?sequence=1.
29. Morozov, E. (2013). To Save Everything Click Here (Public Affairs).
30. Nothias, T. (2020). Access granted: facebook’s free bascis in Africa. Me-
dia, Cult. Soc. 42, 329–348.
31. US Department of State (2019). Civil society 2.0. https://2009-2017.state.
gov/statecraft/cs20/index.htm.
32. Irani, L. (2019). Hackathons and the cultivation of platform dependence. In
Digital Economies at Global Margins, M. Graham, ed. (MIT Press), p. 225.
33. Hajric, V., and Greﬁeld, K. (2021). WhaleFarm Crash Is Latest Is Too Good
to Be True DeFi Collapse. (Bloomberg). https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2021-06-30/whalefarm-crash-is-latest-too-good-to-be-
true-deﬁ-collapse.
34. European Commission (2020). The Commission’s European Innovation
Council awards V5 million to blockchain solutions for social innovations.
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/commissions-
european-innovation-council-awards-eu5-million-blockchain-solutions-
social.
35. NGI (2020). Blockchains for social good. https://www.ngi.eu/wp-content/
uploads/sites/48/2020/02/16.-OXBBU.pdf.
36. Adolﬁni, S. (2020). The US Could Deliver Cheques Faster – with
Tech’s
Help.
(Wired).
www.wired.com/story/opinion-the-us-could-
deliver-stimulus-checks-faster-with-techs-help/.
37. Gerard, D. (2020). Libra shrugged: how facebook tried to take over money.
www.davidgerard.co.uk/blockchain/libra/pp.93.
38. GBBC (2021). About GBBC. https://gbbcouncil.org/about/.
39. Southurst, J. (2021). ‘Naturally Decentralized’ Island Nations like Tuvalu
Are Perfect for Blockchain Ledgers, Says Forum. (Coingeek). https://
coingeek.com/naturally-decentralized-island-nations-like-tuvalu-are-
perfect-for-blockchain-ledgers-says-forum/.
40. Rollins, A. (2017). Bypassing Banking with Blockchain. (In the Black). https://
www.intheblack.com/articles/2017/08/01/Bitcoin-bypasses-banks.
41. Ninai, S. (2017). Making it Real: Blockchain in Papua New Guinea.
(Lowy Institute). https://auspng.lowyinstitute.org/article/making-it-real-
blockchain-papua-new-guinea/.
42. Patterson, J. (2018). Marshall Islands Launches ‘The Sovereign’, the World’s
First Crypto Tender. (Finance Magnate). https://www.ﬁnancemagnates.
com/cryptocurrency/news/cryptocurrencynewsmarshall-islands-launches-
sovereign-worlds-ﬁrst-crypto-tender/.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
7
Perspective

--- Page 8 ---
43. Broderick, R. (2021). El Salvador’s President Is Pioneering Hustle
Bro Populism. (Foreign Policy). https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/07/19/el-
salvador-bukele-bitcoin-hustle-bro-populism/.
44. Centro de Estudios Ciudadanos. (2021). Los Salvadoren˜ os Opinan
Sobre
la
Ley
de
Bitcoin
(UFG).
https://www.disruptiva.media/wp-
content/uploads/2021/07/Encuesta-Bitcoin-Final.pdf.
45. Madianou, M. (2019). Technocolonialism: digital innovation and data prac-
tices in the humanitarian response to the refugee crises. Social Media +
Soc. 5, 1–13.
46. Papua New Guinea Government (2018). Finschaffen special economic
zone bill. https://d6mljhs7208w9.cloudfront.net/uploads/2018/09/FSEZ-
Bill-Bind.pdf.
47. PNG Blogs (2018). Controversial bill could push ﬁnschhafen to be sold to
foreign company, Atlas Ledger. https://www.pngblogs.com/2018/08/
controversial-bill-could-push.html.
48. McGarry, D. (2017). Bitcoin of the Realm? (Daily Post). https://www.
dailypost.vu/opinion/bitcoin-of-the-realm/article_644693e4-796e-5a71-
819f-16dd900acb31.html.
49. McGarry, D. (2018). The Companies We Keep. (Daily Post). https://www.
dailypost.vu/opinion/the-companies-we-keep/article_07616bfb-0705-
5dbf-a89e-a75919c4c367.html.
50. Ward, E., and Lyons, K. (2021). Who’s Buying vanuatu Passports?
(The Guardian). https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jul/15/whos-
buying-vanuatus-passports-crypto-moguls-wanted-men-and-even-a-
prime-minister.
51. Vila Times (2018). Vanuatu’s paciﬁc private bank acquired by Lithuanian
‘‘Cryptocurrency’’
bankera.
https://www.vilatimes.com/2018/01/26/
vanuatus-paciﬁc-private-bank-acquired-by-lithuanian-cryptocurrency-
bankera/.
52. Crypto Rank (2021). Bankera. https://cryptorank.io/price/bankera.
53. Reserve Bank of Vanuatu (2018). Public notice: use of cryptocurrencies
and blockchain. https://www.rbv.gov.vu/images/Press_Releases/2018/
PR10%20-RBV%20Stance%20on%20the%20cryptocurrencies.pdf.
54. Reynolds, K. (2021). Binance isn’t allowed to be operating in the UK,
Watchdog Warns (Coindesk). https://www.coindesk.com/binance-isnt-
allowed-to-be-operating-in-the-uk-watchdog-warns.
55. Tether (2021). Rich list. https://wallet.tether.to/richlist.
56. IBM (2019). Dear tech. https://vimeo.com/356437337.
57. Gramm, P., and De Soto, H. (2018). How Blockchain Can End Poverty.
(Wall
Street
Journal).
https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-blockchain-
can-end-poverty-1516925459.
58. Nicole, R. (2016). The People versus the Commission: Resistance to Land
Registration in Fiji’s Early Colonial History. (Conference proceedings).
http://repository.usp.ac.fj/9090/.
59. Ron˜ o, C.A., Kent, P., and Ikhwan, T. (2018). Developing a Blockchain-
Based Land Registry System for Fiji. (ADB Knowledge Events). https://
events.development.asia/materials/20181204/developing-blockchain-
based-land-registry-system-ﬁji.
60. Rovoi, C. (2021). Fiji Govt Urged to Scrap Plan to Amend Land Bill. (RNZ).
https://www.rnz.co.nz/international/paciﬁc-news/448102/ﬁji-govt-urged-
to-scrap-plan-to-amend-land-bill.
Dr. Olivier Jutel is a communications lecturer at the University of Otago whose
research has been concerned with digital media and politics. His ongoing work
examines the role of techno-utopian and cyber-war discourses in the geopol-
itics of platforms. Jutel’s work is highly interdisciplinary, bringing together po-
litical economy, critical theory, and psychoanalytic political theory to examine
the rise of online political movements and the failures of the normative liberal
visions of the internet. His work in the Paciﬁc follows 4 years of teaching and
researching at The University of the South Paciﬁc in Fiji.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
8
Patterns 3, January 14, 2022
Perspective
