
--- Page 1 ---
Blockchain for Social Impact: 
Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against 
Climate Shocks in Nepal
Kamal Al-Alwan, Arushi Dahiya, Laura Hochheim Thomé, Vedant Iyer, Shristi Piya, Dilip Soman

--- Page 2 ---
The Reach Alliance
The Reach Alliance is a consortium of global universities — with partners in Ghana, South 
Africa, Mexico, Canada, United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and Singapore — 
developing the leaders we need to solve urgent local challenges of the hard to reach — those 
underserved for geographic, administrative, or social reasons. Working in interdisciplinary 
teams, Reach’s globally minded students use rigorous research methods to identify innovative 
solutions to climate, public health, and economic challenges. The United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) provide inspiration and a guiding framework. Research is 
conducted in collaboration with local communities and with guidance from university 
faculty members, building capacity and skills among Reach’s student researchers.
The power of the Reach Alliance stems from engaging leading universities to unleash 
actionable research insights for impact. These insights have been published in 
numerous journals such as The Lancet and BMJ Global Health and are being used 
by policymakers and sector leaders, such as the Government of Canada and the 
Stanford Social Innovation Review, to catalyze impact around the world.
The Reach Alliance was created in 2015 by the University of Toronto’s Munk School of Global 
Affairs & Public Policy, in partnership with the Mastercard Center for Inclusive Growth. It is 
guided by an advisory council of leaders in academia, and in the private, public, and nonprofit 
sectors who help to drive impact, influence and scale, and support fundraising efforts.
The Reach Alliance
Note: Authors are listed alphabetically with the faculty mentor 
listed last.
Cover photo: Rahat conducting an awareness and digital 
capacity-building workshop with beneficiaries (Photo courtesy 
of Rumsan)

--- Page 3 ---
Acknowledgements
This case study is a labour of love that was made possible 
thanks to many different individuals’ support. We express 
our sincere gratitude to Smriti Chhetri for her consistent 
communication and coordination throughout this past year 
and to Shristi Piya for her resourcefulness and guidance. Their 
support was vital to the smooth execution of this work. We 
thank Rumee Singh for giving us the opportunity to share 
this exciting and impactful innovation with the world. We 
are grateful to all stakeholders from Mercy Corps, Namaste 
Pay, the Finnish Red Cross, Nepal Red Cross Society, Tikapur 
and Janaki Municipalities in Nepal, and the Danish Red 
Cross, without whose insights and contributions this research 
would not have been possible. A special thank you to Moni 
Kim for her steadfast mentorship during fieldwork. Finally, 
we acknowledge the use of AI tools to support interview 
transcription in preparing this report (ottera.ai).
This research was vetted by and received approval from the 
Ethics Review Board at the University of Toronto.
Contribution
Contributor (initials) 
Conception or design of the work
AD, DS, KA, LHT, MK, SP, VI
Data collection
AD, KA, LHT, MK, SP, VI
Data coding
AD, KA, LHT, VI 
Data analysis and interpretation 
AD, DS, KA, LHT, VI
Drafting of the case study report
AD, DS, KA, LHT, MK, SP, VI
Critical revision of the case study 
report
AD, DS, KA, LHT, MK, SP, VI
Final approval of the version to 
be submitted
AD, DS, KA, LHT, MK, SP, VI

--- Page 4 ---
1
1
5
6
9
17
22
24
Contents
Executive Summary
Disaster Risk Management Context
Research Approach
Anticipatory Action As a Solution to Disaster Relief
Rahat’s Blockchain Solution
Key Findings of Our Research
Scaling and Sustainability
Lessons Learned 
	

--- Page 5 ---
In Nepal, disaster-prone regions face 
persistent barriers to effective humanitarian 
aid delivery due to the country’s unique 
geography and consequently, the nation’s 
natural disaster landscape. The need for 
inclusive, anticipatory, and resilient aid-
delivery systems has never been more urgent, 
particularly as climate-induced disasters 
become more frequent and severe. 
Rahat, a blockchain-enabled humanitarian 
aid platform developed by Nepal-based 
tech firm Rumsan, responds to this need 
by enhancing the efficiency, transparency, 
and inclusivity of cash and communication 
before, during, and after disasters. Rahat 
facilitates multimodal access including short 
message service (SMS), interactive voice 
responses (IVR), mobile apps, and QR-coded 
physical tokens to ensure that even the most 
marginalized populations can access aid. The 
platform enables real-time fund disbursement, 
centralized beneficiary management, and 
multistakeholder coordination by consolidating 
communication, disbursement, and data 
management into a single interface. Its offline 
transaction capabilities and partnerships with 
payment service providers allow the system to 
function even in the midst of disasters when 
internet access is scarce. A key innovation within 
Rahat is its anticipatory action module, which 
focuses on proactive disaster response and was 
piloted for the first time in September 2024 
during the monsoon season in the Barbardiya, 
Gulariya, Janaki, and Tikapur districts in Nepal.
Blockchain technology, while only one 
component of the platform, offers critical 
benefits. Rahat replaces fragmented, 
rudimentary tools (like WhatsApp or 
spreadsheets) with a traceable, secure, 
and auditable dashboard that streamlines 
anticipatory action and ensures accountability. 
By offering multisignatory triggers and real-time 
tracking, it reduces duplication and builds trust 
among stakeholders involved in disbursing aid 
to victims of floods or other natural disasters. 
However, its success depends on careful 
integration with Nepal’s legal and institutional 
disaster risk management (DRM) context.
Key stakeholders involved in disaster response 
in Nepal report that Rahat has improved 
coordination, accountability, and transparency 
across agencies and levels of government. 
The platform’s design helps minimize 
residual risk in emergency aid distribution 
and contributes to building a more robust, 
data-driven social protection infrastructure. 
Compared to conventional development-
oriented cash-transfer systems, blockchain 
platforms like Rahat offer enhanced traceability 
and reliability — though they require 
strong technical capacity and inter-agency 
coordination to fully realize their potential.
The Rahat platform offers a compelling proof of 
concept for how emerging technologies, when 
localized and co-developed with communities 
and partners, can shift disaster response from 
reactive to anticipatory. By addressing policy 
gaps, strengthening multilevel partnerships, 
and refining its user-centred technological 
design, Rahat exemplifies how inclusive 
digital systems can foster more resilient, 
dignified, and accountable humanitarian aid 
in the face of accelerating climate risks.
	
Disaster Risk 
Management Context
Nepal represents a unique and fragile case 
because of its complex topography — the 
high Himalayas and low-lying Terai plains (see 
Figure 1). This distinctive geography makes 
the country especially prone to recurring 
Executive Summary
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
1

--- Page 6 ---
the country especially prone to 
recurring hydrometeorological 
and geophysical disasters like 
floods (our focus in this case 
study), droughts, earthquakes, 
and landslides. Worse still, these 
calamities further exacerbate 
the region’s existing social and 
economic fragilities, marked 
by poverty, poor infrastructure, 
caste-based exclusion, and 
environmental degradation. This 
dual intersection of climate risk 
and human insecurity positions 
Nepal as one of the nations that 
are most vulnerable to climate 
change, which is expected to 
intensify the frequency and 
impact of natural disasters. 
Despite growing policy efforts, 
particularly after the introduction 
of the Disaster Risk Reduction 
Management Act of 2017, weak 
coordination, limited 
local capacity, and an 
emphasis on reactive 
disaster response continue 
to undermine climate 
resilience in the region.
The Terai region’s flooding 
problems stem from 
both natural and human-
caused (anthropogenic) 
factors. With over 6,000 
rivers flowing from the 
Himalayas, the area’s 
monsoon rains often 
lead to overflowing 
riverbanks that inundate 
the plains (including 
in the Terai). These 
floods are worsened 
by deforestation, 
poor embankment 
maintenance, and 
Figure 1. Topographical and political maps of Nepal (from Sanam Aksha, Luke Juran, 
and Lynn Resler, “Spatial and Temporal Analysis of Natural Hazard Mortality in 
Nepal,” Environmental Hazards 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
2
Figure 2. Key country-level statistics of Nepal

--- Page 7 ---
Smrity Upadhyay and Kavita Arora, “Disaster-induced Vulnerabilities and Institutional Response in Indo-Nepal Tarai Region,” In 
International Handbook of Disaster Research, edited by Amita Singh (Singapore: Springer, 2023), 413–32. 
This is particularly relevant given that anticipatory action is still a relatively new approach to aid delivery in Nepal (first 
introduced in 2018).
urban encroachment. The region also has an 
incredibly high population density which has 
contributed to poor drainage infrastructure, 
and large areas of informal settlements that 
have heightened risks and the scale of human 
and economic devastation from flooding.1
Delivering humanitarian aid is a highly 
complex operation, particularly when it 
comes to defining and coordinating the roles 
and responsibilities of nongovernmental 
organizations, government bodies, and 
private sector actors. For aid delivery to 
function effectively, the needs, capacities, 
and responsibilities of each stakeholder 
must be clearly established in advance. This 
clarity is essential because when disaster 
strikes, the situation on the ground is already 
chaotic — any ambiguity or confusion over 
who is responsible for what can lead to 
delays and inefficiencies at a time when 
rapid, organized support is most critical.
The management and delivery of humanitarian 
aid for disaster in Nepal involves a number 
of stakeholders operating at multiple levels 
of government. Federally, the Department of 
Hydrology and Meteorology and the National 
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management 
Authority coordinate national disaster 
preparedness and response efforts. Municipal-
level disaster risk reduction focal persons 
are responsible for local implementation 
and, as of recently, have gained greater 
authority in decision making during disasters 
thanks to legal amendments that assign 
more power to municipalities. This shift 
is a significant win for local governments 
who experience devastation first-hand and 
understand the local socioeconomic context 
and thus are best positioned to act quickly. 
However, despite their increased autonomy, 
municipalities often lack the financial and 
technical resources to respond independently 
and still have to request support from the 
federal government — a process that can 
be challenging, especially in the anticipatory 
phase when the benefits of these programs 
can be abstract and more difficult to quantify.2 
Local organizations such as the Nepal Red 
Cross Society deploy volunteers to deliver 
aid at disaster sites, while funding partners 
— including Mercy Corps, the Danish Red 
Cross Nepal, and the Finnish Red Cross 
Nepal — finance aid delivery. These funds are 
transferred to beneficiaries through financial 
institutions and payment providers who 
facilitate secure and timely cash transfers.
Figure 3. A banner about disaster risk management at the 
Danish Red Cross office in Kathmandu, Nepal
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
3
1
2

--- Page 8 ---
In recent years, 
Nepal has 
seen notable 
improvements 
in DRM, driven 
in part by the 
widespread 
human loss 
caused by major 
natural disasters 
such as the 2015 
earthquake and 
the 2019 floods. 
However, despite 
these advances 
over the past decade, 
traditional disaster 
relief approaches’ 
significant limitations persist, necessitating 
continued innovation and strengthening 
of disaster risk management systems.
Traditional disaster responses in the Indo-
Nepal Terai region have been primarily 
reactive and focused on postdisaster relief 
rather than pre-disaster planning. They include 
emergency rescue, ad hoc relief distribution, 
and rehabilitation, which are often delayed 
because of weak inter-agency coordination, 
lack of real-time data, and insufficient 
resources. Institutional silos between local, 
national, and cross-border entities exacerbate 
this inefficiency and the lack of anticipatory 
financing and early warning systems can 
compound disaster impacts year after year, 
consequently hindering long-term resilience.
Finally, the reactive nature of the traditional 
disaster management model creates delayed or 
absent early warnings, minimal preparedness, 
and a heavy reliance on rescue and relief after 
impact. This often means that communities 
suffer from a significant loss of life and property 
and a long, costly recovery. These limitations of 
Nepal’s DRM prevent some of the nation’s most 
vulnerable populations from being protected, 
supported, and empowered as disasters occur.
Hardest-to-Reach Populations
Considering that humanitarian action has 
traditionally been reactive, rather than 
anticipatory, communities in the Terai region 
are further put at risk because of long response 
times. Apart from delays in postdisaster 
management, disaster-prone communities 
also face significant barriers to financial 
inclusion. For example, many households 
lack access to formal financial services which 
limits their ability to build financial resilience, 
save for emergencies, or access timely aid. 
Another common challenge is the lack of 
official identity or citizenship cards among 
beneficiaries, which may restrict their eligibility 
for government-affiliated financial and social 
protection programs. Although Terai region’s 
geography and vulnerability to climate shocks 
put the entire population at risk, some of the 
most vulnerable community members include 
1.	 people with disabilities, 
2.	 seniors (those 60 and older), 
3.	 pregnant and lactating women, and 
4.	 members of “scheduled castes.” 
Figure 4. Disaster Management Program Implementation Districts 2018 poster at the 
Danish Red Cross office in Kathmandu, Nepal
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
4

--- Page 9 ---
Some of these hard-to-reach 
populations are typically also registered 
in the federal government’s Social 
Security Assistance program. 
In Rahat’s anticipatory action pilot program in 
2024, people with disabilities in the Barbardiya, 
Gulariya, Janaki, and Tikapur districts were 
targeted as the main beneficiaries. People with 
disabilities are already a disproportionately 
affected group, especially when considering 
climate disaster scenarios, where mobility, 
communication, and resource barriers can 
make rapid actions like evacuation even more 
difficult. For this hard-to-reach community 
and other marginalized groups, Rahat’s 
blockchain solution attempts to address 
these barriers through a dual approach of 
anticipatory action and financial inclusion.
	
Research Approach
Our research employed a systematic multiphase 
approach to examine the effectiveness of 
Rahat’s blockchain solution, with a particular 
focus on its anticipatory action module. While 
the case study addresses Rahat’s platform as 
a whole, our analysis centres mainly on the 
anticipatory action model.
The Rahat anticipatory action project was 
implemented for the first time in September 
2024 in collaboration with the Danish Red Cross 
(DRC) and funded by the GSMA Innovation 
Fund in the Barbardiya, Gulariya, Janaki, and 
Tikapur districts in Nepal’s Terai region. The 
program was designed to facilitate timely and 
effective actions before flooding occurred 
in these regions. As a successful pilot, the 
initiative enabled cash transfers for 774 
beneficiaries with disabilities: 410 individuals 
in Barbardiya and 364 in Gulariya. The 
distribution of cash support was completed 
within a rapid time frame of 5 hours, 23 
minutes, and 51 seconds after activation. In 
addition to cash, 4,583 beneficiaries received 
early warning notifications via SMS and 
interactive voice response (IVR) five to six 
hours after activation, ensuring timely alerts.
We began with comprehensive research 
focusing on three key areas: (1) blockchain 
technology in humanitarian assistance, (2) 
anticipatory action approaches in disaster 
Figure 5. Nepal Red Cross staff (Source: “Monsoon Pilot 2024: Digital and Blockchain Technologies in Anticipatory Action 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
5

--- Page 10 ---
response, and (3) climate vulnerability in Nepal’s 
Terai region. We analyzed academic literature, 
reports from the humanitarian sector, and 
existing documentation regarding the Rahat 
platform to gain an understanding of current 
approaches to humanitarian cash transfers, 
the function of blockchain technology in aid 
distribution, best practices for anticipatory 
action in flood response, and the specific 
challenges involved in reaching vulnerable 
communities in Nepal. This preliminary 
research helped us to identify knowledge gaps, 
particularly concerning the effectiveness of 
blockchain-based anticipatory action systems 
and their impact on community resilience, 
thereby informing our primary research design.
To fill these knowledge gaps, our team 
conducted field research in May 2025 in 
Kathmandu. We conducted semi-structured 
interviews with multiple stakeholder 
groups who have direct involvement in or 
understanding of the Rahat platform and its 
implementation. Relevant groups include 
officials from Rumsan (responsible for 
implementation), local municipal government 
partners, representatives from Danish Red 
Cross Nepal, community members, and local 
vendors participating in the voucher system.
Our sampling strategy used purposive and 
snowball sampling to identify key informants 
through our collaboration with Rumsan and 
leverage their networks to connect with 
additional relevant stakeholders. Next, 
we analyzed the collected data using a 
structured coding approach. This analysis 
focused on identifying key aspects such as 
the effectiveness of the early warning system, 
the impact of anticipatory cash transfers 
on household preparedness, community 
perceptions of blockchain-based aid delivery, 
operational challenges and successes 
in reaching vulnerable populations, and 
comparative advantages over traditional 
cash-transfer programs. By assigning each 
participant a unique identification number to 
replace their personal details in all data sets we 
ensured that interview data were anonymous.
Findings from our research reveal that 
while the Rahat platform has shown strong 
operational potential, deeper structural and 
systemic barriers persist that limit its scalability 
and long-term impact. These include the 
absence of a national anticipatory action 
policy, a national ban on cryptocurrency, and 
low blockchain and technological literacy 
among many stakeholders. Building toward a 
national anticipatory framework and clarifying 
blockchain regulation will be essential to 
scaling an innovation like Rahat. Furthermore, 
frequent and structured touchpoints between 
stakeholders — from government bodies 
like the Department of Hydrology and 
Meteorology to local community managers 
— are needed to ensure coordination, 
alignment, and mutual learning. Importantly, 
scaling anticipatory action remains hindered 
by unreliable long-term weather forecasting 
data and unsustainable funding models. 
Nepal’s forecasting infrastructure has improved 
significantly, but trust and data accuracy 
remain concerns. These challenges highlight 
the importance of strengthening anticipatory 
action frameworks in disaster-prone regions.
Anticipatory Action As a 
Solution to Disaster Relief
Anticipatory action is an approach to disaster 
risk management (DRM) that focuses on 
providing warnings and aid to people living 
in disaster-prone areas before disaster strikes. 
More than just immediate cash relief or 
giving monetary assistance before a disaster 
hits, anticipatory action in practice includes 
awareness programs, community workshops, 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
6

--- Page 11 ---
Juan Chaves-Gonzalez, Leonardo Milano, Dirk-Jan Omtzigt, et al., “Anticipatory Action: Lessons for the Future,” Frontiers in 
Climate, 4 (2022). 
Zoe Scott, “How Can Anticipatory Action Reach Scale and Sustainability? Learning from CERF in Nepal,” Learning report, 
Centre for Disaster Protection, 2023. 
3
4
and sharing important information — it is a 
highly holistic and community-based approach.3
Components of Anticipatory 
Action: Preparedness, 
Readiness, and Activation
Typically, to ensure the alignment of public, 
private, and nongovernmental stakeholders 
involved in disaster risk management, roles and 
responsibilities and triggers are all outlined in 
Early Action Protocols (EAPs). These protocols 
are drafted in advance of disaster and provide 
accountability and clarity when disaster strikes.
The Danish Red Cross (DRC) first pioneered 
the use of anticipatory action in disaster 
relief in 2018. The DRC Nepal has continued 
to act on the frontier of anticipatory action, 
leveraging the expertise of other national DRC 
and International Federation of Red Cross 
and Red Crescent Societies chapters that 
have successfully deployed it, evidenced by 
its pilot program with Rahat. In the broader 
context of international aid and development 
organizations in Nepal, interest in anticipatory 
action has increased exponentially since 2018. 
Its adoption has become so widespread that 
some actors cynically see it as a buzzword 
aimed to attract funders of aid efforts. 
To support this growing use of anticipatory 
action, the National Disaster Risk Reduction 
and Management Authority, Nepal’s top 
governing body that coordinates and oversees 
all disaster relief efforts, has organized 
three national dialogues on anticipatory 
action. The first of these took place in 2019, 
catalyzed by devastating mass casualty 
natural disasters. They brought together 
international development organizations, 
disaster relief officials from all levels of 
government, and private sector organizations 
that provide technology solutions to deliver 
aid in anticipation (e.g., Rumsan). These 
national dialogues were organized with the 
explicit long-term goal of creating a unified 
policy framework for deploying anticipatory 
action. Although this has not yet materialized, 
the upcoming fourth national dialogue is 
heavily focused on collating expertise from 
different disaster-relief stakeholders to 
standardize anticipatory action efforts.4
Table 1. Anticipatory action vs postdisaster relief
Timing of Aid
Anticipation action
Postdisaster
Mode of aid
Physical goods
Physical items prior 
to disasters
Physical aid after 
disaster
Cash
Physical
Physical cash 
transfers in 
anticipation
Postdisaster physical 
cash transfers
Digital
Technology-based 
cash in anticipation
Postdisaster physical 
cash transfers
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
7

--- Page 12 ---
 Chaves-Gonzalez, et al. “Anticipatory Action: Lessons for the Future.” 
5
Anticipatory Action’s Advantages 
Over Other Forms of Disaster Relief 
Multiple stakeholders emphasized that 
anticipatory action cannot replace disaster 
risk management in its entirety. Rather, it 
should be viewed as a component of an 
overarching disaster risk management strategy 
that clearly outlines roles and responsibilities 
for each stakeholder before, during, and 
after a disaster. A technical officer at an 
international aid organization in Nepal put 
this succinctly, telling us “[anticipatory action] 
is a piece of disaster risk management 
initiatives, not a stand-alone approach to 
disaster risk management. [It] will just address 
the residual risk of disaster risk management 
initiatives. If you try to cover everything within 
anticipatory action, it wouldn’t work.” 
As Table 1 shows, anticipatory action differs 
from traditional postdisaster relief by focusing 
on preparedness and early response, allowing 
communities to act before a hazard strikes 
rather than react only afterward. Municipal 
government stakeholders consistently 
emphasized this signature advantage: 
prior to anticipatory-action-based disaster 
relief, people would be devastated by 
disasters and view themselves as victims 
who needed and therefore demanded aid 
from the government and international aid 
organizations. But as anticipatory action has 
increasingly been adopted, there has been 
a significant mindset shift among people 
living in flood-prone areas because they are 
eager to equip themselves with the support 
they need to not become victims in the first 
place once they receive early warnings.5
Although not directly an advantage, another 
important component of anticipatory action 
programs in Nepal (and globally) is that they 
use a “no regret” approach, meaning that 
disbursement of cash or aid is not rescinded 
if a disaster doesn’t strike after the activation 
stage. This feature further incentivizes 
beneficiaries to embrace anticipatory action 
Table 2. Understanding the optimal aid delivery model
Aid decision
Superior option
Benefits
Supporting quotes from 
municipal DRM officials
Mode
Digital cash
Hands decision making to the hardest 
to reach, enables them to prepare 
themselves in times of disaster as 
they best see fit (empowerment).  
Also enables a “no regrets” approach 
because cash support better 
improves beneficiaries’ well-being in 
case of false alarms
“Before there used to be equal 
distribution of goods. For 
example, if there were 10 glasses, 
one glass was distributed to 
each household, but now people 
can buy what they need. So if 
someone needs food, they can 
buy food and so on.”
Timing
Anticipatory 
action
Ensures the hardest to reach are 
focused on taking steps to avoid 
disasters, rather than relying on 
external stakeholders to rebuild and 
recover once disaster strikes
“As soon as the disaster struck, 
they used to believe, since they 
were victims, they wanted relief. 
But now they want to avoid being 
victims. So that’s the shift that we 
have noticed [with anticipatory 
action].”
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
8

--- Page 13 ---
because even when climate shocks don’t 
occur, people can use cash and aid to 
support their livelihoods, instead of fearing 
retribution through being forced to repay 
cash or return non-cash aid (see Table 2).
There is also a financial imperative to move 
toward anticipatory action. Interactive Voice 
Recordings (IVR) and other forms of early 
warnings and cash in advance of disasters 
enable beneficiaries to buy items like sandbags 
to protect their homes and evacuate areas 
surrounding river basins, ultimately reducing 
the human casualties of floods. Property 
damage is not entirely mitigated by anticipatory 
action, but its scale is reduced 
when people are aware of the risk 
and can put valuables in elevated 
areas in their homes. This dual 
effect of mitigating property and 
human loss reduces the need for 
postdisaster aid. A stakeholder 
from a development organization 
estimated that each dollar invested 
in anticipatory action results in a 
30-dollar reduction in human and 
property damage, demonstrating its 
efficacy in not only reducing human 
suffering, but reducing the financial 
burden of postdisaster aid that governments 
and international agencies shoulder.
The most scalable and effective aid solution 
is one based on anticipatory action that 
disburses digital cash. Rumsan is a technology 
provider that implements this solution using 
a blockchain-based platform focused on 
accountability and timely aid delivery.
	
Rahat’s Blockchain Solution
Rumsan is a digital innovation company 
dedicated to creating impactful solutions for 
society using frontier technology. Rahat — 
its flagship solution — supports vulnerable 
communities by improving their access to 
financial services, especially in the context of 
humanitarian aid. The organization has three 
main operations:
1. Aid access and delivery. Rumsan started 
with a cash and voucher platform to help 
vulnerable communities receive timely aid 
during emergencies.
2. Capacity building. Recognizing that 
access alone isn’t enough, Rumsan runs 
digital finance and literacy training sessions 
for beneficiaries, vendors, mobilizers, 
and humanitarian 
partners. These 
capacity-building 
efforts ensure that all 
users can effectively 
use digital financial 
tools, making aid 
delivery more 
inclusive and efficient.
3. Financial resilience 
products. Rumsan 
aims to expand 
into microloans and 
insurance products 
to help vulnerable populations build 
longer-term financial resilience. Although 
still in early development stages, its 
vision is to support sustainable economic 
empowerment beyond immediate aid.
Core Technology Architecture
Rahat is Nepal’s first blockchain-based 
anticipatory action cash-transfer platform. 
At its technical core, it functions as a digital 
infrastructure that creates a permanent 
corruption-free ledger of all aid distributions 
while consolidating all stakeholder 
responsibilities and activities and an associated 
list of beneficiary data that is required in any 
humanitarian response. 
Anticipatory action 
differs from traditional 
postdisaster relief by 
focusing on preparedness 
and early response, 
allowing communities to 
act before a hazard strikes 
rather than react only 
afterward.
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
9

--- Page 14 ---
Figure 6. Rahat’s blockchain architecture explained
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
10

--- Page 15 ---
Figure 7. EAP schematic
The platform was initially developed during 
the COVID-19 pandemic as a solution for 
transparent grocery distribution.
The foundation of Rahat’s technology stack is 
blockchain — a decentralized database system 
that records information in a way that makes it 
extremely difficult to change, hack, or cheat the 
system. Unlike traditional databases, blockchain 
creates a series of “blocks” containing 
transaction data, with each new block linked 
to all previous blocks in a cryptographically 
secure manner. This architecture (see Figure 5) 
enables Rahat to maintain a tamper-resistant 
record of every aid transaction, from beneficiary 
onboarding to initial aid approval to final 
disbursement.
Importantly, blockchain does not equal 
cryptocurrency — its function in Rahat is 
entirely different. Blockchain in this context 
solves the persistent issue of communication 
and information management that NGOs and 
the government in Nepal have long struggled 
with (see Figure 6). By offering a shared, 
transparent system for tracking aid delivery 
and managing beneficiary data, it becomes a 
highly effective solution in the specific context 
of humanitarian response and aid delivery in 
Nepal.
Smart Contracts and Tokenization
One of Rahat’s distinctive features is its 
implementation of smart contracts — self-
executing agreements with terms directly 
written into code. These smart contracts 
automate the distribution process through 
tokenization. This automation is a key 
innovation, allowing for programmed 
disbursement and operational actions to 
be executed automatically once predefined 
*These are a list of non-exhaustive sample tasks outlined in an Early Action Protocol for the Karnali River Basin in Janaki Rural 
Municipality that highlight the diverse nature of tasks involved in supporting with flood prevention AA efforts
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
11

--- Page 16 ---
triggers are met. This capability shifts disaster 
response from being reactive to enabling 
pre-agreed early action, significantly reducing 
delays in aid delivery and operational 
responses.
Tokens within Rahat represent cash that can 
be exchanged for physical goods or services 
by authorized vendors. As a blockchain officer 
at Rumsan explained, “The idea of tokenizing 
the distribution process [ensures] transparency 
and efficiency.” This tokenization system allows 
aid agencies to distribute cash, food, or service 
vouchers digitally while maintaining a verifiable 
record of every transaction. The effectiveness 
of these automated, forecast-linked actions, 
however, is fundamentally dependent on the 
accuracy and timeliness of the underlying 
forecast data. Without reliable data to feed 
into the triggers, the full potential of this 
automation, which offers a seamless transition 
from reactive to pre-agreed early action, cannot 
be fully realized.
Anticipatory Action Module
The most innovative aspect of Rahat’s 
technological solution is its anticipatory action 
module, which transforms disaster response 
from reactive to proactive (see Figure 7). The 
module automates the integration of weather 
forecast sources and other data, improving 
decision making and communication prior to 
disaster events. This system incorporates:
1. A multi-signature trigger system. 
Critical decisions require approval from 
multiple authorized stakeholders before 
funds are released.
2. Hydrological data integration. The 
platform collects real-time data from various 
sources including Nepal’s Department of 
Hydrology and Meteorology and the Global 
Flood Awareness System.
3. Automated early warning notifications. 
The system sends alerts via SMS and 
Interactive Voice Recordings (IVRs) to 
beneficiaries in high-risk areas.
As a project coordinator at the Danish Red 
Cross described, “The trigger mechanism 
involves overlaying weather forecasts with risk 
analysis to prioritize actions and communities ... 
The application also includes human analysis to 
ensure accurate and timely decision making.”
Comprehensive Dashboard
Importantly, the Rahat platform brings many 
stakeholders together. This centralization is 
precisely what is needed in a humanitarian 
aid-delivery solution and has been missing in 
aid responses to flooding in the Terai. So how 
does it operate? Rahat’s user interface centres 
on an integrated dashboard that serves as the 
command centre for humanitarian organizations 
and government partners. A staff member of a 
local develop organization that has supported 
the implementation of Rahat explained: The 
platform provides a dashboard for “disaster 
response, including disbursement, beneficiary 
management, and anticipatory action 
modules.” It “supports proactive responses with 
forecasting data and trigger management” and 
assigns users “specific roles with predefined 
permissions.
Key dashboard features include:
Real-time monitoring of funds allocation 
and disbursement
Beneficiary data management and 
verification tools
Project activity tracking and stakeholder 
communication
Integration of multiple weather forecast 
sources
Visualization of risk areas and affected 
populations.
To address potential connectivity challenges 
in times of natural disaster, the Rahat app’s 
•
•
•
•
•
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
12

--- Page 17 ---
Figure 8. How Rahat’s anticipatory action platform works
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
13

--- Page 18 ---
offline functionality allows transactions to be 
processed without internet connectivity. It syncs 
transactions when connected to the internet, 
but double spending can still occur, which 
needs to be resolved manually.6 Rahat employs 
several strategies to overcome connectivity 
challenges:
SMS-based communication: Essential for 
areas with basic cellular service but limited 
internet
Interactive Voice Response: Enables 
communication with beneficiaries who may 
have limited literacy
QR card distribution: Physical cards 
containing QR codes that represent digital 
tokens for beneficiaries without phones.
Beneficiary Access Mechanisms
For beneficiaries in remote areas who lack 
technical knowledge and smartphones, Rahat 
uses “custodial wallets” managed by Rumsan, 
that allow beneficiaries to control their wallets 
through SMS. Simply put, a “custodial wallet” 
is a digital wallet managed by a third party on 
behalf of the user. This means beneficiaries can 
access and control their funds through simple 
SMS commands without needing to navigate 
the wallet which is sometimes a new and 
potentially foreign digital technology for them. 
This approach helps ensure financial access and 
inclusion for beneficiaries in the Terai region 
who have limited digital literacy.
The platform supports three primary methods 
for beneficiaries to access aid:
Mobile-based access. For beneficiaries 
with smartphones who can use a dedicated 
app. They do not use the Rahat dashboard 
— only stakeholders involved in aid 
distribution and/or monitoring do.
SMS-based access. For those with basic 
mobile phones but no internet access
QR card system. For individuals without 
phones, providing a physical token that can 
be redeemed at predesignated local stores.
Figure 9. Rahat dashboard
That is, re-recorded or re-entered in the ledger.
6
•
•
•
•
•
•
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
14

--- Page 19 ---
A payment service provider involved in the 
project explained that their role was “to 
disperse funds, leveraging their offline service 
provider status, which is crucial during natural 
disasters when digital services may fail.” This 
multimodal approach ensures that even the 
most technologically disconnected populations 
can be served.
Financial Service Integration
To facilitate cash transfers, Rahat integrates 
with existing financial service providers while 
maintaining blockchain verification. The 
platform has “partnered with UNICEF and other 
organizations, impacting more than 80,000 lives 
through various projects.”
The system accommodates multiple financial 
distribution channels:
Direct mobile money transfers for unbanked 
beneficiaries
Cash and value vouchers redeemable 
through local vendors
Bank transfers where traditional banking 
infrastructure exists
Local agent networks for areas without 
formal banking presence.
The flexibility of these distribution methods 
allows Rahat to operate effectively across 
varying contexts while maintaining the 
accountability advantages of blockchain 
technology.
Rahat consolidates information management 
for disaster-relief stakeholders in the form of 
a dashboard and helps to coordinate roles 
and responsibilities for each stakeholder, 
improving accountability (see Figure 9). An 
official at a development organization, who 
otherwise was skeptical about the efficacy of 
blockchain technology, explained this benefit to 
us: “the main value proposition with the Rahat 
platform is to simplify. It is centralizing a lot of 
these different functions that previously were 
siloed. Say there was one function that was 
directly transferring bank to bank. There was 
information through WhatsApp, through email. 
You want to get all that into one place to make 
it easier, just one central system where you 
Figure 10. Workshop on user-centric design of the Rahat platform for anticipatory action, 2024 (Source: “Workshop on 
User-Centric Design of Rahat platform for Anticipatory Action, 2024,” Rahat) 
•
•
•
•
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
15

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 11. Advantages of blockchain for humanitarian aid
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
16

--- Page 21 ---
have communication, coordination, information 
management, and access to the actual weather 
forecast.”
Despite its clear operational gains and its role 
in addressing many pain points for delivery 
organizations and other aid stakeholders 
concerning existing cash-transfer programs, 
the Rahat platform still faces several structural 
barriers and design flaws that prevent it from 
reaching its full potential.
Implementation Challenges
Digital financial illiteracy is one of the 
common challenges with digital cash-transfers 
programs, and Rumsan’s solution, Rahat, has 
helped address this issue through digital 
financial literacy workshops. Apart from the 
workshops, community support systems and 
local volunteers play a critical role in guiding 
individuals through mobile money processes. 
Beyond digital literacy, other implementation 
hurdles include system integration difficulties, 
infrastructure weaknesses, and limitations within 
the mobile application itself.
A notable issue has been the disconnect 
between delivery humanitarian organizations 
and Rumsan, the tech company behind Rahat. 
As a technology-focused entity, Rumsan’s 
design choices sometimes do not fully capture 
the realities of field workers. For instance, 
field staff often lack regular access to laptops, 
yet the Rahat dashboard, crucial for viewing 
and updating information, was not initially 
designed for mobile access during this pilot 
project. However, a mobile version of the app 
is currently under development to address this 
specific need.
Future Technological Improvements
To enhance the Rahat platform’s capabilities 
and address existing limitations, several 
technological improvements are in the pipeline. 
These include:
Development of mobile applications for 
field teams. This directly addresses the 
need for field staff to access and update 
the Rahat dashboard on the go, improving 
operational efficiency.
Integration with artificial intelligence (AI) 
for improved decision making. Leveraging 
AI could further refine risk analysis and 
anticipatory action triggers.
Enhanced offline functionality for disaster-
affected areas. This improvement is critical 
given the potential for internet connectivity 
disruptions during natural disasters, 
ensuring continued operation when online 
access is scarce.
Expanded financial service partnerships 
for broader reach. Increasing the network 
of financial service providers will allow 
Rahat to serve an even wider range of 
beneficiaries.
Incorporation of additional hazard 
monitoring beyond flooding. While 
currently focused on hydrometeorological 
disasters like floods, expanding monitoring 
to other hazards would broaden Rahat’s 
applicability for comprehensive disaster risk 
management in Nepal.
	
Key Findings of Our 
Research 
Anticipatory Action
Anticipatory action in Nepal offers a number of 
benefits when compared to traditional cash-
transfer programs, although several limitations 
persist. Previously, national legislation 
restricted municipalities from distributing cash 
to flood victims ahead of disasters, thereby 
limiting proactive disaster response. However, 
following the introduction of the Disaster Risk 
Management framework in 2018, anticipatory 
•
•
•
•
•
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
17

--- Page 22 ---
action was formally integrated as a disaster-
response mechanism. Municipalities are now 
responsible for convening disaster management 
committee meetings and verifying beneficiary 
data through elected local boards to determine 
which households or beneficiaries will receive 
relief and in what order. 
However, while local governments possess 
autonomy in disaster 
management, they often 
lack the financial resources 
and operational frameworks 
needed to implement 
anticipatory action 
effectively. Early Action 
Protocols, developed in 
collaboration with the Red 
Cross and Red Crescent 
Climate Centre in Nepal, 
outline actions to be taken before floods and 
identify the triggers and thresholds necessary 
to initiate early warnings. In 2023 there was a 
regional dialogue that generated evidence for 
a political push on anticipatory action’s positive 
impact. This dialogue resulted in a shared 
goal to establish a national anticipatory action 
clinic and roadmap along with a framework 
for Anticipatory Action in Nepal by 2030, to 
ensure it is recognized as a national process and 
clarifies the role of the multiple stakeholders 
involved. Overall, while anticipatory action 
enhances preparedness and response, its 
scalability hinges on improved funding 
structures, institutional clarity, and coordination 
across government tiers. 
Why Blockchain?
Blockchain technology presents a strong value 
proposition for disaster relief by enhancing the 
efficiency, transparency, and accountability 
of cash-transfer systems. When effectively 
implemented, blockchain can centralize 
beneficiary data, streamline the anticipatory 
action process, and consolidate stakeholder 
responsibilities during emergencies. The 
Rahat platform exemplifies this by reducing 
duplication and ensuring accountability through 
a transparent, traceable system. Before Rahat’s 
adoption, many nongovernmental organizations 
(NGOs) and local government actors relied 
heavily on fragmented communication channels 
— such as WhatsApp groups and ad hoc 
spreadsheets — which often led to chaotic 
coordination, information 
silos, and inefficiencies in aid 
distribution. 
By contrast, Rahat’s 
blockchain-based dashboard 
manages both the early 
action processes and the 
disbursement of funds, 
enabling multisignatory 
transactions and real-time 
monitoring. These features 
help build trust — an essential element 
in humanitarian aid contexts. Moreover, 
blockchain systems mitigate the risk of fund 
mismanagement and contribute to a more 
transparent social protection infrastructure. 
However, challenges remain, including 
difficulties in real-time data updating for 
field staff and ongoing concerns about data 
protection and the secure management of 
beneficiary information. Also, explanations of 
blockchain technology to non-technical aid and 
disaster risk stakeholders can create confusion 
and discourage engagement and interest. Still, 
compared to development-oriented cash-
transfer programs, blockchain-based systems 
offer greater reliability and traceability, though 
they demand substantial technical capacity 
and stronger intergovernmental coordination. 
Ultimately, blockchain complements 
anticipatory action by minimizing residual risk 
and enhancing the integrity of aid delivery 
mechanisms.
Critical Success Factors
For an anticipatory action blockchain solution to 
work smoothly, it needs certain features built in 
While anticipatory action 
enhances preparedness 
and response, its scalability 
hinges on improved funding 
structures, institutional 
clarity, and coordination 
across government tiers.
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
18

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 12. Rahat’s implementation challenges
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
19

--- Page 24 ---
from its design to implementation. For example, 
the platform’s design has to support data 
sharing and management efficiently and quickly, 
as required by an early action approach to 
disaster relief. Awareness workshops were also 
highlighted as a central part of this initiative. For 
it to be effective, beneficiaries must develop 
self-sustainability through financial literacy and 
understanding of anticipatory action. Strong 
partnerships and coordination among both 
implementing and non-implementing actors 
of the project were also emphasized because 
enabling collaboration can lead to greater 
success. These insights point to important 
considerations for the sustainability and scaling 
of Rahat’s anticipatory action platform.
Factor 1: Platform Design 
Beneficiary management tool. Rahat’s 
platform plays a crucial role as an information 
management system. Users, including local 
governments and humanitarian organizations, 
emphasized that its value lies in the ability to 
quickly and accurately identify beneficiaries, 
centralizing all necessary data in one place 
and reducing duplication. Once beneficiaries 
are identified, their information gets uploaded 
to the system, enabling rapid and efficient 
selection and fund disbursement once the 
trigger is activated. 
Early warning messages. Another important 
aspect of the platform is its early warning 
message system. During the preparedness, 
readiness, and activation phases, Rahat uses 
multiple communication methods, such as 
SMS and Interactive Voice Response (IVR), to 
send early warnings quickly and effectively, 
helping beneficiaries better prepare for and 
understand the current climate forecast. In the 
pilot program, most beneficiaries took proactive 
measures after receiving early warning 
messages.
Figure 13. Reach Alliance team at the Rumsan office in Kathmandu
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
20

--- Page 25 ---
Municipal actors noted that the IVR tool, in 
particular, proved highly effective for reaching 
illiterate individuals because it provides voice 
messages rather than text. Rahat not only 
enhances reliability by supporting multiple 
activations in a short time but also significantly 
improves inclusion and accessibility. In 
addition to these digital tools, door-to-door 
communication by local volunteers from 
the Nepal Red Cross further extended the 
platform’s reach, ensuring critical messages 
reached even the most vulnerable communities.
Stakeholder communication. A major success 
factor in Rahat’s pilot was the way it enhanced 
communication and improved transparency 
and accountability among stakeholders. The 
Rahat dashboard allowed for real-time activity 
tracking, enabling stakeholders to assign 
tasks based on the early action protocol and 
allocate responsibilities to specific groups. This 
clear division of roles made it easier to follow 
up on early action tasks, allowing for a more 
systematic and efficient response. 
Before using Rahat, stakeholders relied on an 
“informal” network of communication, mainly 
through WhatsApp, phone calls, and emails. 
However, as a Danish Red Cross officer noted, 
“If I don’t check my phone for 30 minutes, 
there’s going to be 100 notifications, and it’s 
difficult to go through that, and then you can 
miss out on important information,” adding 
that for “someone from headquarters level, 
it is quite overwhelming.” This underscores 
how relying on informal channels can create 
serious implementation challenges, especially 
during the high-pressure period following a 
trigger activation, including missed information, 
overlapping responsibilities, and limited 
accountability or coordination among actors.
Humanitarian workers noted that the 
information recording tool in the Rahat platform 
was particularly valuable for how it brought 
together diverse stakeholders, given that 
anticipatory action is a layered process with 
responsibilities distributed across different 
levels. This structure allowed everyone 
involved to track progress, identify who was 
responsible for specific tasks, and maintain a 
record of critical information throughout the 
project phases. This approach not only clarified 
individual roles but also strengthened overall 
communication across various levels of the 
response.
Finally, in addition to improving communication, 
Rahat now also supports task and resource 
coordination workflows. For example, it can 
automatically trigger early activities like drain 
clearing after certain forecast thresholds. This 
functionality expands Rahat’s anticipatory 
action beyond just cash assistance to also 
support broader operational readiness during 
the time of disaster.
Factor 2: Awareness Workshops 
Rahat’s awareness and capacity-building 
workshops on digital financial literacy and 
anticipatory action were also a success factor 
of the initiative. These sessions not only raised 
awareness about digital fraud risks but also 
educated beneficiaries on the concept and 
importance of anticipatory actions. Municipal 
actors noted that these sessions significantly 
improved community preparedness and 
understanding since informed individuals 
were more likely to evacuate to safer regions, 
reducing the risk to human life. Local 
government officials observed that these 
programs helped reduce instances of fraud 
because beneficiaries became more cautious 
about sharing their phone numbers and 
personal information, addressing past issues 
where cash transfers were stolen.
These workshops were also fundamental in 
addressing digital illiteracy, even in areas 
with low levels of digitization, by equipping 
communities with the skills they needed 
to foster digital self-resilience and self-
sufficiency. Contrary to initial expectations, 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
21

--- Page 26 ---
some stakeholders emphasized that literacy 
and digital literacy were less of a barrier in 
Nepal than we expected. A staff member from 
a payment service provider noted that low 
literacy is “not an obstacle because when it 
comes to these kinds of anticipatory actions, 
there is always someone who is helping 
them [beneficiaries] out ... Even if they are 
illiterate, there is someone who is assisting 
them.” They also stressed that the Nepalese 
population’s rate of change with respect to 
digital and financial literacy rates has improved 
dramatically. For example, five years ago only 
40 per cent of people had bank accounts but 
that number has now doubled to 80 per cent. 
During the implementation of the anticipatory 
action project, several volunteers from the 
Nepal Red Cross and local communities were 
trained to support beneficiaries, demonstrating 
that illiteracy can be mitigated, or at least 
reduced, through community-based assistance 
and volunteer engagement.
This success factor directly contributed to 
the outcomes observed in the effectiveness 
of anticipatory action. As a staff member at 
a local development organization told us, 
anticipatory action goes beyond direct cash 
assistance, with capacity building being one of 
its primary benefits. “The actions we selected 
for the anticipatory actions should not harm 
the community but further build the resilience 
for other hazards.” This shift in mindset and 
understanding among beneficiaries can lead 
to more efficient and impactful humanitarian 
responses.
Factor 3: Partnerships
The Rahat project created a valuable 
opportunity for collaboration between 
humanitarian organizations and the tech sector. 
Implementation partners like the Nepal Red 
Cross Society and Danish Red Cross noted 
that the project helped break down barriers 
to digital technology adoption within their 
teams, fostering a more innovative culture. This 
marks an important step in demonstrating how 
technology can be leveraged to fill critical gaps 
in delivering anticipatory action. 
At the same time, however, the project also 
revealed challenges in establishing a broader 
national and institutional framework for 
collaboration. For example, despite Rumsan’s 
central role, efforts to formalize partnerships 
with certain government agencies proved 
difficult. This highlights a key tension: while the 
project had the potential to foster innovative 
collaborations, it also exposed the institutional 
and bureaucratic obstacles that continue to 
hinder effective cross-sector coordination in 
anticipatory action.
Scaling and Sustainability
Data Collection for Anticipatory 
Action
One of the biggest impediments to anticipatory 
action’s broader adoption in Nepal is a lack of 
data availability, caused by a lack of regional 
and national partnerships aimed at broad 
weather data collection. Anticipatory action 
works best when shocks are cyclical and 
relatively easily predictable, with ample data 
from various local, national, regional, and global 
sources to cross-check and validate each other. 
These data sources are then collated to identify 
the relevant levels of predictable variables that 
can be used as triggers to initiate the required 
early action protocol. As recently as 2014, 
flood forecasting data in Nepal was extremely 
unreliable, until the Department of Hydrology 
and Meteorology undertook significant efforts 
to improve the frequency and coverage of its 
network of over 800 weather stations across 
the country. These efforts, which include the 
adoption of telemetrics (e.g., transition from 
manual to automatic weather stations), have 
allowed for significant improvements in the 
Department of Hydrology and Meteorology’s 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
22

--- Page 27 ---
flood forecasts. However, relative to other 
national contexts where anticipatory action 
has flourished and been widely adopted, 
Nepal’s forecasts are still unreliable, especially 
significantly earlier in time from the actual 
disasters. This lack of accurate forecasting data 
has resulted in (1) mistrust from people living in 
flood-prone areas who previously have ignored 
early warnings and other communications 
and (2) a reliance on other major weather 
data collectors when developing anticipatory 
action triggers (e.g., data from Global Flood 
Awareness System).
Complementing this past decade’s rapid 
advancements in data collection and accurate 
short-term flood forecasting, the Department 
of Hydrology and Meteorology has set its 
sights on impact-based forecasting and 
partnered with international development 
organizations to improve its flood forecasting 
infrastructure and gain access to data from 
other South Asian nations that Nepal shares 
rivers with.
Funding Concerns
Aside from Rahat’s technical components, a 
lack of sustainable funding has jeopardized the 
progress of disaster risk-management efforts 
in Nepal. Beyond the uncertainty introduced 
by US President Donald Trump’s funding cuts 
to USAID, which supported many disaster-relief 
efforts in Nepal, major funders’ interests are 
also moving away from anticipatory action, 
according to international aid stakeholders. 
Part of this stems from the short-term nature 
of funding contracts, which haven’t provided 
sufficient time to develop triggers, onboard 
beneficiaries, and ultimately provide aid and 
early warnings on a recurring basis during 
each monsoon season. Longer-term funding 
structures (e.g., ten years instead of three to five 
years) would enable a clearer demonstration 
of the long-run cost-saving and empowerment 
benefits of anticipatory action. 
To respond to such concerns about funding, 
Rumsan is exploring other uses of blockchain to 
raise funds. For example, it recently partnered 
with a leading eyewear company to distribute 
blockchain-based vouchers for free glasses in 
countries across Southeast Asia and East Africa 
using its Rahat platform. Rumsan believes these 
organizations are able to commit to longer-
term contracts that mitigate concerns about the 
benefits of blockchain not being realized due to 
initially slow digital infrastructure development.
Application of Blockchain in Other 
Development and Aid Contexts
Similar to the use of Rahat to support corporate 
foundations’ humanitarian efforts, Rumsan is 
also exploring additional avenues to leverage 
its blockchain platform, especially in regulatory 
contexts that enable blockchain to be used 
to its full potential. For example, Rumsan 
Figure 14. International Federation of Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) country delegation office 
in Kathmandu
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
23

--- Page 28 ---
is exploring a pilot with UNICEF to carry 
out blockchain-to-blockchain cash voucher 
assistance. 
In this proposed pilot, both the transaction 
record and the movement of funds would occur 
entirely on the blockchain. Unlike the Nepal 
pilot with Danish Red Cross, which focused 
on low-tech beneficiaries using SMS-enabled 
custodial wallets, this initiative is designed for 
recipients with greater access to digital tools 
and information. These include previously 
economically prosperous refugees who have 
sufficient digital literacy to set up and manage 
their own digital wallets. Aid would be delivered 
in the form of cryptocurrency or stablecoins, 
which are digital currencies pegged to stable 
assets like the US dollar.
The use of cryptocurrency or stablecoins in 
humanitarian aid has several advantages: 
it allows for faster disbursement, greater 
transparency, and traceability of transactions, 
and facilitates cross-border payments without 
reliance on traditional banking infrastructure. 
By enabling beneficiaries to transact directly or 
off-ramp into local fiat currency, such models 
allow for more autonomous and dignified forms 
of aid.
Innovations like this illustrate how the same 
Rahat technology used in anticipatory action 
can be adapted and localized to meet the 
diverse development and humanitarian needs 
of different regions. Even within Nepal, the 
possibilities for scaling anticipatory action 
technology are large. An official from a 
development organization told us about the 
potential for anticipatory action being used 
in other disasters and national issues. “Nepal 
struggles with dengue and heat. It would be 
really nice if we could use [anticipatory action] 
for three different early action protocols (flood, 
dengue, heat) because at the end of the day, 
[Rahat] is an information management system, 
so why not use this in other contexts? The 
possibility is quite immense.”
Achieving the promise and scale of anticipatory 
action is not an easy task, and much of it will 
require significant shifts in policy, partnerships, 
and technology from Rumsan and anticipatory 
action stakeholders. In each of these three 
areas, these scaling considerations inform our 
lessons learned and implications.
	
	
Lessons Learned
Implication 1: Advocate and Build 
Toward a National AA Framework
Currently, there is no dedicated regulation or 
policy on anticipatory action within Nepal’s 
disaster-risk-management framework. This 
regulatory gap poses significant challenges 
to implementing anticipatory action at the 
municipal level, where unclear mandates and a 
lack of institutional support can hinder timely 
and effective action. To address this, stronger 
advocacy is needed, particularly during key 
national platforms such as the annual National 
Dialogue on Anticipatory Action. These 
events offer a strategic opportunity to engage 
stakeholders and build momentum toward 
establishing a stronger national framework that 
would provide the necessary policy guidance, 
coordination, and institutional support to scale 
anticipatory action initiatives across all levels of 
government.
Implication 2: Set Up Frequent 
Touchpoints Between All 
Stakeholder Groups
As part of ongoing advocacy efforts to build 
an effective anticipatory action framework, 
constant communication with stakeholders is 
key. To enhance coordination, we recommend 
frequent and structured touchpoints, such as 
working groups, consultation processes, and 
regular coordination and planning meetings. 
A central working group with key stakeholders 
would help prevent duplication of efforts, 
reduce fragmentation, and allow for better 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
24

--- Page 29 ---
alignment of roles, resources, and timelines 
among partners. These mechanisms would 
support up-to-date knowledge sharing, 
ensure alignment of initiatives, and strengthen 
joint efforts in policy advocacy. Ultimately, it 
would foster a more cohesive and responsive 
anticipatory action ecosystem in Nepal
Implication 3: Crypto and Blockchain 
Regulation in Nepal
A major hindrance to the Rahat platform 
realizing its full potential is the legal status of 
cryptocurrencies in Nepal, which are completely 
banned. However, the nation’s central bank, 
the Nepal Rastra Bank, published a white 
paper assessing the benefits of launching a 
central bank digital currency (CBDC) in 2022, 
demonstrating some government interest 
in adopting and using cryptocurrency. By 
advocating for further advancements in Nepal’s 
cryptocurrency and blockchain policy, Rumsan 
could deliver cash transfers to beneficiaries, 
further streamlining and centralizing processes 
through the Rahat platform.
Implication 4: Use a Stakeholder-
Based Blockchain Communication 
Framework
Instead of communicating the value of Rahat 
and its blockchain technology architecture using 
a one-size-fits-all approach for all stakeholders, 
Rumsan should tailor its message. One of 
the big pain points for people implementing 
and delivering aid was their confusion with 
blockchain, muddying its value proposition 
and consequently reducing the trust they had 
in Rahat. By solely communicating blockchain 
technology and its applicability to funding 
organizations and other high-level decision 
makers, Rahat could avoid this and ensure 
Area
Finding
Implications
Policy
There is currently no anticipatory 
action regulation within the disaster 
risk-management framework in 
Nepal
Cryptocurrency is illegal in Nepal
Advocate and build toward 
a national anticipatory action 
framework 
Set up frequent touchpoints 
between all stakeholder groups to 
avoid duplication of efforts
Address obstacles in current crypto 
and blockchain regulation
Partnerships
Barriers to building an extensive 
national and institutional system for 
collaboration
There is an overlap of 
responsibilities and roles
Awareness programs are vital, but 
there is a need to improve and 
expand
Use a stakeholder-based blockchain 
communication framework
Strengthen and empower local 
government/community 
Build financial sophistication 
among local communities to ensure 
self-sustenance of disaster relief 
delivery
Technology
The platform was not designed for 
offline use 
Blockchain accounts for just a minor 
part of the Rahat platform
Explanations of blockchain 
technology can create confusion 
and discourage engagement and 
interest
Ensure continuous design 
consultation with aid and delivery 
organizations as the platform is 
built out
Create mobile and offline variations 
to accommodate for ways of 
working in the field
Decouple platforms from 
“blockchain” and instead focus on 
information management
Generate evidence to support 
funding and scale-up
•
•
•
•
•
Table 3. Key implications for policy, partnerships, and technology
•
•
•
•
	
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
25

--- Page 30 ---
that stakeholders who need to know about 
blockchain and its specifics have the information 
they need, while not confusing stakeholders 
involved in implementation.
Implications 5 & 6: Awareness 
Workshops and Community Self-
Sustainability 
Multiple stakeholders recognized awareness 
workshops on digital financial literacy and 
anticipatory action, conducted under the 
Rahat anticipatory action initiative, as a best 
practice. To build on this success, we strongly 
recommend continuing these workshops 
with increased frequency — both during the 
preparedness phase and in the postflood 
period. Additionally, conducting follow-up 
assessments after flood events is essential to 
evaluate their impact and identify opportunities 
for improvement, ensuring the workshops 
remain responsive to community needs and 
contribute to long-term resilience.
While financial illiteracy remains a potential 
barrier, several stakeholders emphasized that 
it is not one of the major obstacles in Nepal. 
However, given its importance in strengthening 
long-term resilience, we strongly recommend 
continuing and expanding awareness 
workshops aimed at building financial 
sophistication among local communities.
Implication 7: Ensure Continuous 
Design Consultation with Aid and 
Delivery Organizations As the 
Platform Is Built Out
Building on the approach established in this 
anticipatory action project, it is crucial to 
continue regular, user-centred consultations 
throughout the platform’s development. 
Incorporating feedback from diverse sectors, 
especially from those who actively use the 
platform, will ensure that its design remains 
practical, effective, and aligned with on-the-
ground needs. These ongoing consultations will 
help bridge the gap between the technological 
and humanitarian sectors by creating a platform 
that is both technically robust and user friendly 
for humanitarian actors. 
Implication 8: Create Mobile and 
Offline Variations to Accommodate 
for Working in the Field
Understanding the reality of the Rahat 
platform’s end users — members of 
development organizations delivering aid at 
the municipal level — is pivotal. Their work in 
the Terai area often means they have limited 
access to the internet and have to rely on 
spotty (although rapidly improving) mobile 
data. Their work in the field is also arduous and 
long, preventing them from being able to log 
changes and mark tasks complete on the Rahat 
dashboard (which is available on only desktop 
computers and laptops). Frequent updates from 
all stakeholders are crucial when delivering aid 
through an anticipatory action approach so 
the Rahat platform should be expanded to be 
available on mobile data and potentially, offline 
(similar to the Unstructured Supplementary 
Service Data or USSD technology used by 
Nepal’s leading digital payments companies 
to execute money transfers without internet 
access). Rumsan is already developing some 
of these versions, demonstrating they are 
receptive to feedback from their implementing 
partners, who initially lobbied for offline and 
mobile functionality.
Implication 9: Decouple Platforms 
from “Blockchain” and Instead Focus 
on Information Management
Although the Rahat platform incorporates 
some blockchain technology, its core strength 
lies in its function as an effective information 
management system. Given that cryptocurrency 
is illegal in Nepal and that blockchain 
remains an unclear concept among many aid 
stakeholders, Rumsan’s messaging should shift 
away from “blockchain” and instead highlight 
Rahat’s practical value as an information 
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
26

--- Page 31 ---
management tool. Overemphasizing the 
blockchain aspect has, in some cases, led to 
confusion or disinterest, limiting stakeholder 
engagement and the expansion of the 
platform’s adoption. 
Implication 10: Generate Evidence 
to Support Funding and Scale-Up
Adopting a strong evidence-based approach 
is essential to secure funding and support the 
scale-up of Rahat. Continued engagement 
in producing research can help demonstrate 
anticipatory action’s impact and build 
credibility with funders. To support this, we 
recommend continued partnerships with 
academic and research initiatives, such as 
Rumsan’s collaboration with the Reach Alliance, 
to produce rigorous evidence needed to shift 
perceptions around blockchain and anticipatory 
action, influence policy, and attract long-term 
investment.
Incorporating feedback from 
diverse sectors, especially 
from those who actively use 
the platform, will ensure that 
its design remains practical, 
effective, and aligned with 
on-the-ground needs.
Figure 15. Beneficiaries learning how to navigate the system and early warning messages
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
27

--- Page 32 ---
Research Team
Kamal Al-Alwan is an industrial 
engineering student at the University 
of Toronto researching the intersection 
of technology and humanitarian aid 
delivery, with particular expertise in 
blockchain applications for disaster 
response and climate resilience. Kamal 
brings extensive experience in data 
science and AI solutions from his work 
at Northbridge Financial, University 
Health Network, and Microsoft, 
where he developed machine 
learning models, automated complex 
processes, and led cross-functional 
teams on technology implementation 
projects. His technical expertise spans 
operations research, machine learning, 
and cloud technologies, with a focus 
on applying these tools to address 
real-world challenges in healthcare, 
finance, and humanitarian contexts.
Arushi Dahiya graduated from the 
University of Toronto with an honours 
BA in international development 
studies (co-op), political science, and 
socio-cultural anthropology. She 
has worked with the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime in Laos on 
an alternative development project 
focused on reducing illegal opium 
cultivation and conducted research on 
climate decarbonization strategies with 
the 100 Resilient Cities initiative. She 
has also researched social solidarity 
economies and how marginalized 
communities challenge capitalist 
norms by focusing on prioritizing social 
profitability over financial gains. As a 
Jackman Scholar-in-Residence Fellow, 
Arushi studied sustainability in higher 
education, coding and analyzing 
mission statements to assess higher 
education institutions’ commitments 
to, and framing of, sustainability.
Laura Hochheim Thomé recently 
completed her Master of Global 
Affairs (MGA) at the University of 
Toronto’s Munk School of Global 
Affairs & Public Policy.  Across the 
public sector, NGOs, and international 
organizations, her work has focused on 
migration and refugees, human rights, 
and international development. As 
a research intern at the International 
Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth 
(IPC-IG), she supported international 
development research projects 
on social protection policies in the 
Global South. Laura was also a 
research volunteer for the “Projeto 
Vida Migrante Empreendedora,” a 
project supporting the socioeconomic 
integration of Venezuelan immigrants 
in Porto Alegre (Brazil). She aims to 
work in policy assessment, research, 
and international development 
projects for refugees and migrants, 
particularly women in Latin America.
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
28

--- Page 33 ---
Vedant Iyer recently completed 
his undergraduate degree at the 
University of Toronto, where he studied 
management, data analytics, and 
economics. He recently interned in 
McKinsey and Company’s Toronto 
office, where he co-developed the 
five-year corporate strategy for a 
major crown corporation. He also 
designed interview guides and 
interviewed subject matter experts 
to gather insights that validated 
his team’s strategy development 
work. Completing over ten pro-
bono consulting projects, he has 
supported large organizations like 
Greenpeace and Jack.org and small 
nonprofits and startups. Academically, 
Vedant has conducted econometric 
research on the impacts of foreign-
educated students on democracy 
and how shocks to electoral violence 
affect political trust in Nigeria.
Shristi Piya has over seven years 
of experience driving digital 
transformation in diverse sectors 
like health, humanitarian aid, and 
agriculture. She has led impactful 
projects such as Hamro LifeBank, 
AgriClear, and Rahat, leveraging 
frontier technologies like blockchain. 
As chief development and impact 
officer at Rumsan, she develops and 
implements strategic initiatives to 
enhance organizational efficiency and 
achieve company goals. Her dedication 
extends to using Rahat (a flagship 
product of Rumsan) to address several 
real-world challenges in access to 
finance for vulnerable communities 
through innovative initiatives like 
anticipatory action.
Dilip Soman is a Canada Research 
Chair in Behavioural Science and 
Economics at the Rotman School of 
Management, University of Toronto. 
He has degrees in behavioural science, 
marketing, and engineering, and 
is interested in the applications of 
behavioural science organizations 
more generally, and for welfare and 
policy in particular. He is the co-
author of Managing Customer Value 
(2022), author of The Last Mile (2015), 
and co-editor of The Behaviorally 
Informed Organization (2021), 
Behavioral Science in the Wild (2022), 
Cash Transfers for Inclusive Societies 
(2023), and What Works, What Doesn’t 
(and When) (2024). Dilip serves as 
the director of the Behaviourally 
Informed Organizations partnership. 
He has taught in the USA, Hong Kong, 
and Canada, and has worked with 
several corporations, governments, 
international organizations, and start-
ups. His non-academic interests 
include procrastination, cricket, travel, 
and taking weekends seriously.
Blockchain for Social Impact: Empowering Vulnerable Communities Against Climate Shocks in Nepal
29

--- Page 34 ---
Rumsan, founded in 2013, is a frontier technology company 
dedicated to driving social impact through innovative 
solutions. Rahat is an open-source, blockchain-based solution 
developed by Rumsan. It helps vulnerable communities build 
resilience against climate shocks. By using mobile phones 
and blockchain technology, Rahat delivers aid quickly and 
reliably before, during, and after crises. Rahat has already 
supported over 87,000 individuals and mobilized $243k worth 
of humanitarian support to vulnerable individuals.
https://www.rumsan.com
The University of Toronto (U of T). Founded in 1827, the 
U of T is Canada’s leading institution of learning, discovery, 
and knowledge creation. One of the world’s top research-
intensive universities, students learn from and work with pre-
eminent thought leaders through a multidisciplinary network 
of teaching and research faculty, alumni, and partners. 
Consistently ranked among the top 10 public universities 
worldwide, U of T has remarkable strengths in disciplines 
that span the humanities, social sciences, sciences, and the 
professions. U of T’s three campuses host 93,000
undergraduate and graduate students from 159 countries,
who are taught by 15,000 faculty.
https://www.utoronto.ca
The Center for Inclusive Growth advances equitable and 
sustainable economic growth and financial inclusion around 
the world. The Center leverages the company’s core assets 
and competencies, including data insights, expertise, and 
technology, while administering the philanthropic Mastercard 
Impact Fund, to produce independent research, scale global 
programs, and empower a community of thinkers, leaders, 
and doers on the front lines of inclusive growth.
mastercardcenter.org

--- Page 35 ---
Published by the Reach Alliance, October 2025
Munk School of Global Affairs & Public Policy | University of Toronto
reachalliance.org |       @ReachAllianceTO     TheReachAlliance
