
--- Page 1 ---
BLOCKCHAIN LAND REGISTRY BEST PRACTICES: THE POLITICAL AND 
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY OF HARNESSING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY TO 
IMPROVE LAND ADMINISTRATION 
by 
Lee Bratcher 
APPROVED BY SUPERVISORY COMMITTEE: 
___________________________________________ 
Banks P. Miller, Chair 
___________________________________________ 
Clint W. Peinhardt 
___________________________________________ 
Eric Zheng 
___________________________________________ 
Vijay S. Mookerjee

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
Copyright 2024 
Lee Bratcher  
All Rights Reserved 
 

--- Page 3 ---
This research is dedicated to the millions of people around the world whose property rights have 
been infringed by corruption, mismanagement, and improper titling in land administration. My 
wife Becca and my daughters Kenzie, Ivy and Kayli have been a great inspiration throughout this 
process.  

--- Page 4 ---
BLOCKCHAIN LAND REGISTRY BEST BRACTICES: THE POLITICAL AND 
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY OF HARNESSING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY TO 
IMPROVE LAND ADMINISTRATION 
by 
LEE BRATCHER, BA, MA 
DISSERTATION 
Presented to the Faculty of 
The University of Texas at Dallas 
in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements 
for the Degree of 
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN 
POLITICAL SCIENCE 
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT DALLAS 
August 2024 

--- Page 5 ---
v 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The tremendous assistance and efforts of my dissertation committee made this research possible. 
Dr. Miller, Dr. Peinhardt, Dr. Zheng, and Dr. Mookerjee have all been instrumental in this 
process. My wife has been incredibly patient over the past decade as I have worked towards this 
goal.  
July 2024 

--- Page 6 ---
vi 
BLOCKCHAIN LAND REGISTRY BEST BRACTICES: THE POLITICAL AND 
TECHNICAL FEASIBILITY OF HARNESSING BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY TO 
IMPROVE LAND ADMINISTRATION 
Lee Bratcher 
The University of Texas at Dallas, 2024 
Property rights and, by extension, trusted land administration, are essential elements to the 
progress of any nation that is attempting to rise from poverty to wealth. Hernando DeSoto 
estimates that there exists in the world $20 trillion dollars' worth of real estate owned by the 
world’s poor that is illiquid, underproducing, and ineligible to be used as collateral for loans 
because it is either improperly titled or not titled at all. Furthermore, the World Bank estimates 
that 70% of the world’s population lacks legal title to their land. Blockchain, also known as 
distributed ledger technology, has the potential to radically change record keeping and the 
process of transferring title within the real estate industry.  Blockchain land registries promise to 
increase land tenure security and transparency thereby leading to increased access to credit using 
land as collateral. This study catalogs political and technical obstacles to be overcome for the 
successful implementation of a blockchain land registry pilot in a given jurisdiction and seeks to 
understand the conditions in which a blockchain registry would succeed.  There is a dearth of 
studies examining the political and governance issues surrounding blockchain based land 
registries which is problematics as the political obstacles are far more daunting than the 
technical. 
Supervising Professor: Banks Miller

--- Page 7 ---
vii 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS………………………………………………………………………...v 
ABSTRACT……………………………………………………………………………………...vi 
LIST OF FIGURES………………………………………………………………………..……viii 
LIST OF TABLES………………………………………………………………………………..ix 
CHAPTER 1 AN INTRODUCTION TO BLOCKCHAIN LAND REGISTRIES…..….……..…1 
CHAPTER 2 A BRIEF HISTORY OF REFORM IN LAND ADMINISTRATION….………..18 
CHAPTER 3 OVERCOMING THE TECHNICAL OBSTACLES TO A BLOCKCHAIN 
REGISTRY………………………………………………………………………………………43 
CHAPTER 4 OVERCOMING THE POLITICAL OBSTACLES TO A BLOCKCHAIN 
REGISTRY...................................................................................................................................61 
CHAPTER 5 CONCLUSIONS, DISCUSSION, AND FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS………87 
REFERENCES…………………………………………………………………………………..94 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH……………………………………………………………..….…103 
CURRICULUM VITAE…………………………………………………………………..……104 

--- Page 8 ---
viii 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1. Hash Calculator Example (a)……….…….…………………………………….......…12
Figure 2. Hash Calculator Example (b)…………...……………………………………….….…12
Figure 3. Blockchain Mortgage Process …..……….……………………………...……….……13
Figure 4. Indian Land Registry Map ……………….……………….……..………….…………27

--- Page 9 ---
ix 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1. Technical vs. Political Obstacles ………...…….……………………………………....47 
Table 2. Top Ten Index …………..…………………….…………………….……….…………52 
Table 3. Bottom Ten Index ………………………….……………......…………………………53 
Table 4. Principal Components ....……………………….………………………………………54 
Table 5. Correlation Analysis ……………...…………….………………………………………55 
Table 6. Variable Regression Scoring …..…………....….………………………………………55 
Table 7. The Bottom 10 Countries in the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis ………………....56 
Table 8. Top 10 Countries in the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis .........................................56 
Table 9. Developing Country Blockchain Land Registry Pilots……...……………….…………59 
Table 10. Developed Countries Blockchain Land Registry Pilots..…………………….……..…60 

--- Page 10 ---
1 
CHAPTER 1 
AN INTRODUCTION TO BLOCKCHAIN LAND REGISTRIES 
Blockchain technology, alternatively referred to as distributed ledger technology, is the 
technological framework that underpins cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum. The 
philosophical and technical mechanisms that enable a blockchain to function were unleashed on 
the world by way of an anonymously published white paper in 2008. The pseudonymous author, 
Satoshi Nakamoto, did not use the term blockchain in the paper on peer-to-peer electronic cash 
systems, but the clever code that enabled distributed ledger technology traces its roots to these 
humble beginnings (Bratcher & Sullivan, 2021). While the technology was initially utilized in 
the finance services industry by investors, currencies traders, and libertarian cypherpunks, a 
growing group of technologists and social scientists are realizing the potential applications for 
distributed ledger technology in solving a variety of problems stemming from deficits in social 
capital. Blockchain technology has the potential to be as disruptive in the future as the internet 
has been over the past several decades (Casey and Vigna, 2018). As is common with disruptive 
technologies, most analysts and observers overestimate the technology’s impact in the short-term 
and underestimate it in the long-term. The applications for blockchain in the public sector are 
myriad as it provides are more transparent and secure way of maintaining public registries 
(Kaczorowska, 2019).  
Blockchain technology is essentially a digital, distributed ledger that lacks a central 
administrator. It is a further iteration of double entry accounting developed by Luca Pacioli in the 
late 15th century. The technology might also be compared to the law merchants of the middle 
ages who acted as intermediaries in abrogating the need for trust between merchants. The 

--- Page 11 ---
 
2 
opening question of Milgrom, Douglass, and Weingast’s seminal paper on the role of institutions 
asks, “How can people promote the trust necessary for efficient exchange when individuals have 
short run temptations to cheat?” (Milgrom et al., 1990, p. 1). Modern blockchain technology has 
the capability to transform the way we think about trust institutions.  
 
Technically speaking, a blockchain is a network of computers called nodes. These nodes 
use public key cryptography to secure assets and use various consensus mechanisms to ascertain 
the ordering and validity of transactions. Transaction information is stored on blocks with the 
information from the first block (the genesis block) and the information from each subsequent 
block all hashed together on the current block. By referencing the data from each previous block, 
the information chain is known by all parties to be true and unaltered. It is an append only data 
structure so once it is in the chain, it cannot be removed by anyone. Before blocks of transaction 
information are added to the blockchain, they are subject to a verification and block templating 
process by miners called proof of work for bitcoin. Ethereum and other public blockchains use 
proof of stake but there are many other less often used consensus mechanisms. Proof of stake 
differs from proof of work in that the former distributes consensus to stakers who have staked 
their ETH tokens as validators and the later relies on distributed nodes running the SHA-256 
algorithm. Private blockchains have a permissioned structure that does not require a 
decentralized consensus mechanism. Given the complexity of consensus mechanisms, it 
appropriate to explain bitcoin mining, the process for the proof of work consensus mechanism, in 
more detail here.  
Bitcoin miners are machines, or computers, that incorporate the SHA-256 algorithm as 
they provide “decentralized transaction recording and validation” (VanValkenburgh, 2020). Here 

--- Page 12 ---
3 
is how it works. First bitcoin miners collect new transaction information that has not yet been 
confirmed. For example, recent transactions from the present to ten minutes in the past as a new 
block of transactions are formed approximately every ten minutes (Pritzker, 2019). The next step 
is the formation of a block header which contains information about previous transactions, a 
nonce (number used once), a timestamp, and the network difficulty level at that time. At this 
point, the SHA-256 hash function is applied to the block header with the goal of having the 
resulting string of sixty-four alphanumeric characters be below a target number. As more mining 
machines and therefore more hash power come on the network, the difficulty is adjusted upward 
and the target number becomes correspondingly more difficult for a machine find. To find a 
valid hash, miners must adjust the nonce (number used once) in the block header and hash it 
repeatedly, generating millions or even billions of attempts. This process requires significant 
computational power and electricity to power the machines (Pritzker, 2019). The first miner to 
find a hash under the target number is awarded with the right to form the next block and add it to 
the bitcoin blockchain. The miner broadcasts this block to the other miners in the network. The 
other miners and nodes on the network validate that the miner in question has in fact obtained a 
hash under the target number and validates that all of the transactions in the block are correct. 
This process can be conceptualized by thinking of someone rolling a multi-sided die. 
Imagine that this die had one hundred sides and the numbers one through one hundred each 
written on one of the sides. And then imagine that someone asked you to roll a number under the 
number three. So you are rolling a one hundred sided die attempting to roll a one or a two. It is 
likely to take quite a while to roll a one or a two but once you have, everyone in the room can see 

--- Page 13 ---
 
4 
that you have rolled it. The target number concept is similar but on an exponentially and 
mathematically more complex level (Frumkin, 2022).  
Even just one change to a number in one of the thousands of transactions in that block 
will completely invalidate the block and it will be discarded. As a reward for participating in the 
network and finding the block, the successful miner receives a block reward, which consists of 
newly minted bitcoins and the transaction fees from the transactions included in the block. The 
block reward provides a financial incentive for miners to continue to secure the network and 
validate transactions. At the time of writing the block reward is 6.25 bitcoin but is about to be 
halved to 3.125 bitcoin in April of 2024.  
When two parties transact on a blockchain, they use a combination of their private and 
public keys to submit the transaction to the nodes which then, using the process described above, 
verify the validity of the transaction and add it to the chain. This is the process for a public 
blockchain network like one would find with Bitcoin. Private blockchain networks use other 
consensus mechanisms that are described later. Public blockchains are permissionless while 
private blockchains are permissioned. Permissionless means that anyone can join and participate 
in the network. Permissioned means that there are rules written into the code which allows only 
those entities that are known to view and transact on the network. Permissioned blockchains are 
compliant with Know Your Customer and Anti-Money Laundering regulations. It is not that 
public, permissionless chains an uncompliant with those regulations, but that it is difficult for 
corporations and large enterprises to justify the risk of operating on public networks due to the 
risk of running afoul of regulators.  

--- Page 14 ---
5 
There are also hybrid blockchains that satisfy Know Your Customer and Anti-Money 
Laundering regulations but also use public blockchains to verify “proof of existence” 
(Kaczorowska, 2019). Hybrid or private blockchains remain the most likely to be used in the 
land registry space as most government entities do not trust public blockchains. 
The security of blockchains is another area of strength. Because the complete ledger 
resides on each node (computer) in the network, there is no central point of exploitation for 
hackers. If a hacker gained access to a node and changed transaction information, then that 
change would be rejected by the hundreds of other nodes in the network that know the true state 
of the ledger. In other words, hackers would have to hack into a large number of computers all 
over the world simultaneously in order to attempt to change anything. 
If a malicious actor attempts to insert a false transaction, he or she would need to gain 
control over 51% of the hashing power, or nodes, of the network in a proof of work blockchain. 
This is nearly impossible because most chains have hundreds or thousands of nodes, each with 
the economic incentive to ensure that the integrity of the chain is maintained. Decentralization in 
public blockchains so that one actor cannot control the network is mission critical. Ethereum 
founder Vitalik Buterin describes three separate axes of decentralization below (Buterin, 2017):   
Architectural (de)centralization — how many physical computers is a system made up of? How 
many of those computers can it tolerate breaking down at any single time? 
Political (de)centralization — how many individuals or organizations ultimately control 
the computers that the system is made up of? 
Logical (de)centralization— does the interface and data structures that the system 
presents and maintains look more like a single monolithic object, or an amorphous swarm? One 

--- Page 15 ---
6 
simple heuristic is: if you cut the system in half, including both providers and users, will both 
halves continue to fully operate as independent units? 
Further explanation of this can be found, among other places, in Casey and Vigna’s 
(2018) seminal book, The Truth Machine. 
Blockchain economics is an emerging field of interdisciplinary study that delves into the 
incentives, rules and governance structures of blockchains. Public Choice Theory can elucidate 
the ways in which blockchain economics may affect the economy (Davidson, De Filippi, and 
Potts 2016). While not the focus of this paper, a basic outline of blockchain economics is 
presented here. 
 As Davidson and Potts point out, the gains realized by decentralized systems in 
economics were first enumerated by Adam Smith when he coined the phrase dynamic efficiency. 
Hayek, a champion of the Austrian School, further elaborated on the benefits of open, 
unencumbered markets in Law, Legislation and Liberty. Volume 1: Rules and Order (Hayek, 
1973). The Austrian school’s focus on individual action and libertarian political theory meshes 
nicely with the economics of decentralized ledgers. The economic incentives of nodes in a 
blockchain network form a strong defense against malicious actors. Additionally, the 
decentralization of blockchain coalesces well with the Austrian’s emphasis on laissez-faire 
treatment of markets. There are two different overarching types of blockchains; public 
blockchains and private blockchains. Public blockchains utilize proof of work consensus 
mechanism while private chains use other consensus mechanisms like proof of elapsed time or 
proof of stake, or proof of authority. The libertarian minds prefer public chains because they are 
nearly anonymous and are free from any centralized authority; even governments. Enterprises 

--- Page 16 ---
7 
prefer private chains because of their hybrid approach that allows for many of the transparency 
and immutability benefits of a public chain coupled with the ability to selectively grant access to 
the network. This is important because of the regulations requiring companies to know their 
customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) regulations.  
Public blockchain enthusiasts, while many may not know it, are most closely aligned in 
their thinking with the Ludwig von Mises camp of Austrian Economics. Von Mises advocated a 
libertarian political theory that eschewed most government regulation of the economy. This fits 
well with public blockchains because they are free of any centralize control and provide a good 
deal of anonymity to users. The enterprise blockchain advocates like IBM, Corda, and Quorum 
fall more in line with the thinking of Hayek. Hayek, the most famous Austrian Economist, was a 
bit less radical in his libertarianism and relied more on empirical models than did pure Austrians. 
One of the reasons for his popularity, in addition to his stellar reasoning and writing, was his 
ability to be flexible about the need for regulation of the economy in some circumstances. Just as 
enterprise blockchain companies understand the need for KYC and AML, Hayek knew the 
business and regulatory environment in which he was operating. Most enterprises will be weary 
of public blockchains and will opt for hybrid or private chains. Governments will be tempted to 
opt for private/permissioned blockchains as well because it provides more controls for 
bureaucrats. Private/permissioned blockchains, though, jettison many of the architectural benefits 
that make blockchains appealing in the first place. Private/permissioned chains lack the 
“decentralized” effect that public chains exhibit which leads to greater transparency and 
accountability allowing for trust to increase and transaction costs to fall (mostly as a result of 
fewer intermediaries) (Konashevych, 2020). Countries that lack trusted institutions or whose 

--- Page 17 ---
 
8 
leaders are overly risk averse will be more likely to opt for private/permissioned blockchains. 
The irony here is that a pilot or implementation is more likely to be approved by the political 
veto players using a private/permissioned blockchain, but the chances that this technology fails 
short of the expected benefits greatly increase.  
Several governments have commissioned studies on blockchain for the public sector 
including several states within the United State (Texas, Vermont, Wyoming, Delaware, Illinois, 
Arizona, California and Arkansas) the United Kingdom, Australia, Cyprus, India, Georgia, 
Estonia, Sweden, the European Union and many more. Most of these studies included 
examinations of digital assets, digital securities, and the study of blockchain for real estate. In 
fact, the author is this dissertation is the President of the Texas Blockchain Council, an industry 
association that had its hand in much of the Texas legislation and research on blockchain for the 
public sector.  
The purpose of this research is to understand the political and technical obstacles to 
blockchain adoption for land administration and to theorize as to why the political obstacles are 
now far more significant than the technical obstacles whereas scholarship from the late 2010s 
and early 2020s contemplated the reverse.  
Blockchain in the Marketplace 
 
The true value add in blockchain is a more efficient and transparent transfer of value in a 
trustless environment. In other words, it does not require third party verification due to the 
checks and balances of the distributed network of nodes, clever code and public-private key 
cryptography (Bratcher & Sullivan, 2021). According to IBM, blockchain technology adds 
irrefutable proof that a transaction occurred because of these four qualities: consensus 

--- Page 18 ---
 
9 
(agreement that a transaction has occurred), provenance (history of transactions), immutability 
(an append-only data structure), and finality (an agreed source of truth). In the context of land 
administration, one could see how these four qualities would provide gains in efficiency and 
effectiveness. The real estate industry is “plagued by inefficient processes and unnecessary 
transaction costs defended by self-interested professionals and institutions” (Baum, 2017, p. 1). 
What is more, Transparency International estimates that 20% of the world’s population have paid 
a bribe to register their land or view ownership rights (Avramov, 2017). While there is much to 
be gained in the United States with respect to efficient land markets, there is even more to be 
gained in developing countries. Analysts at De Soto Inc. estimate that there exists in the world 
$20 trillion dollars' worth of real estate owned by the world’s poor that is illiquid, under 
producing, and ineligible to be used as collateral for loans because it is either improperly titled or 
not titled at all (DeSoto, 2000). The introduction of blockchain based land registries could 
greatly increase not only liquidity in land markets in OECD countries, but also unleash millions 
of acres/hectors of land to be used as collateral for loans in developing countries. Blockchain 
land registry pilot programs are underway in South Burlington Vermont, Chicago Illinois (Cook 
County), Wyoming, Australia, Bermuda, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Georgia, Ghana, Honduras, 
several states in India, Japan, Kenya, Liberia, Mexico, The Netherlands, Nigeria, Paraguay, Peru, 
Russia, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, St. Kitts and Nevis, Sweden, Ukraine, UAE, 
United Kingdom, and Zambia. In total, there are 28 blockchain land registry pilots that are either 
in-progress, announced, abandoned, or have moved into full scale production (Currier, 2020).  
 
There are many blockchain technology companies working in the real estate, and 
specifically the land administration, industry vertical. The most influential include, ChromaWay, 

--- Page 19 ---
10 
Medici Land Governance, and Propy. While there are several other blockchain real estate 
companies with large valuations and revenues, these three are unique in that at least part of their 
business model involves working with governments to streamline land administration and 
recording of titles. ChromaWay is a blockchain technology company that operates in multiple 
arenas with land administration just one of four main areas of service offerings (Bratcher & 
Sullivan, 2021). Medici is the leader in blockchain land governance solutions for the developing 
world and does some work in OECD countries as well. Propy is a more traditional real estate 
firm that is working to disrupt the real estate marketplace in the developed world. Their 
blockchain services include land administration services for the recorder’s office and various 
other market-making services. 
Here are a few market indicators that demonstrate the rise in blockchain adoption across a 
variety of industries. Approximately 34% of executives surveyed by Deloitte say that their 
company has initiated a blockchain deployment and 80% of businesses see blockchain as a 
strategic priority (ConsenSys, 2019). The Market Cap of all cryptocurrencies increased from $18 
billion in 2017 to over $600 billion today. IBM alone has 1,500 industry and technical experts 
working on over 500 blockchain projects, several of which pertain to land administration (IBM 
Blockchain, n.d.).   
A Blockchain Solution for Land Administration 
Prior to the description of the processes inherent in most blockchain land registries, a 
definition of terms is required. The most pivotal and novel phrase in this process is a smart 

--- Page 20 ---
 
11 
contract (Bratcher & Sullivan, 2021). Smart contracts are “self-executing contracts with the 
terms of the agreement between buyer and seller being directly written into lines of code. The 
code and the agreements contained therein exist across a distributed, decentralized blockchain 
network. The code controls the execution, and transactions are trackable and irreversible” 
(Frankenfield, 2019). The other phrase with which the reader will want to be familiar is public-
key cryptography. This describes a form of cryptography that utilizes pairs of keys, one of which 
is public and one of which is private. The owner of the private key is the only person with 
knowledge of that key but the public key can be known by anyone that would care to look. 
Encrypted code or text can be decrypted with a private key so that only the owner of the private 
key could view it. Lastly, a hash, is an algorithm that takes an input and transforms it into a 
smaller output. In many blockchain applications, the SHA256 hash algorithm is employed witch 
converts inputs into outputs of 256 bits. This translates to a string of numbers and letters that is 
exactly 64 characters in length.  
Each company involved in the development of a blockchain land registry constructs the 
process differently, but they generally follow a similar pattern, and most utilize private or hybrid 
blockchains. First, a distributed registry is established with pre-written rules coded into the smart 
contract. The registry has a user interface that is accessible to buys, sellers, lenders, attorneys, 
appraisers, the land office, and the public. In each transaction, the smart contract rules grant 
permissions to various actors based on their role in the transaction. The public will have the 
fewest permissions but enough to view transaction histories and ownership. The land office and 
other parties with a need to see deeply into the transaction will have the broadest permissions. 

--- Page 21 ---
12 
Buyers and sellers use a combination of public and private keys to validate their role in the 
transaction.  
A transaction flow might follow a pattern such that the buyer and seller agree to the terms 
of the sale and the terms of the smart contract. Following this, appraisers and lenders conduct 
their due diligence and upload their findings on the blockchain registry in accordance to the 
procedures laid out in the smart contract. The purchaser would then submit the down payment to 
the smart contract escrow account. Following this, the lender would submit the remaining 
payment to the same smart contract escrow account. The smart contract would then execute by 
sending the funds in escrow to the seller while simultaneously sending the token representing 
title and ownership to the buyer and changing ownership status in the registry. This process is 
self-actuating but is visible to and auditable by the land administration office. All of these 
aspects to the transactions are stored on the blockchain in hashes in order to minimize the 
amount of data that is stored on chain. Full copies of all information can be stored off chain with 
hashes and metadata that are on chain pointing back to the source documents. We can be sure 
that no one has changed even a comma in these documents because if something even as small as 
a comma or a single digit were changed, the hash would change dramatically. Figure 1 depicts 
the output of a title record when it is hashed with a SHA-256 algorithm. Figure 2 depicts this 
same title record with the addition of a single comma. As you can see, any attempt to add or 
change any letter or number or even spacing, on the document will generate a completely 
different hash.  

--- Page 22 ---
13 
Figure 1. Hash Calculator Example (a) 
Figure 2. Hash Calculator Example (b) 
The image below is a visual representation of how a blockchain mortgage would be 
registered with the recording authority and how the transaction might develop.  

--- Page 23 ---
14 
Figure 3. Blockchain Mortgage Process 
Source: Home Loan Experts, https://www.homeloanexperts.com.au/home-loan-articles/blockchain-mortgage/ 
Pre-Requisites for Blockchain Adoption in Land Administration 
Graglia and Mellon (2018) note several pre-requisites for successful adoption of a 
blockchain land registry. Obviously there is a spectrum of attainment when it comes to these 
criteria so generally it is assumed that some level of attainment of these pre-requisites are 
necessary but it is unclear as to what level of attainment is necessary. The pre-requisites are: 
•
An Identity Solution – it is important for actors within the transaction ecosystem
to be known through valid and authentic state issued identity.

--- Page 24 ---
 
15 
• A Digitized Land Registry – this technology cannot be used with land 
administrations that do not have at least some of their land records digitized or a 
plan to move in that direction.  
• Multi-signature digital wallets (for private key recovery) – if someone loses a 
private key that demonstrates their ownership of an asset, there must be a key 
recovering mechanism which is only possible through multi-signature wallets.  
• The use of a private or hybrid blockchain – when Graglia and Mellon wrote their 
article it was assumed that private or hybrid blockchains were the only types of 
blockchains feasible for deployment of blockchain based land administration 
systems. However, public blockchains like Bitcoin and Ethereum are capable of 
storing hashes of land and deed records. It is a matter of control and how much 
decentralization a land office is willing to stomach.  
• Accurate Data – perfect data is not needed but blockchains obviously cannot 
improve bad data, they would just perpetuate it.  
• Connectivity and a Tech Aware Population – about two thirds of the world has 
access to the internet and it would be necessary to have internet access for this 
technology. Intermittent internet access is sufficient.  
• A trained and professional land administrator that interacts with the registry – 
there must be some level of buy-in from land administrators and civil servants.  
It is unclear if these pre-requisites have a hierarchy or what level of impact each would have 
relative to the rest (Shuaib et. Al, 2022). To varying extents, these pre-requisites were present in 

--- Page 25 ---
 
16 
each of the pilot programs in the developed and developing countries that will be examined in 
Chapters 3 and 4.  
 
The implementation of blockchain to the real estate transaction process could create 
tremendous opportunities for businesses. Title companies that elect to adopt blockchain or at 
least understand how blockchain can advantage them relative to their peers, could grow their 
market share significantly. Efficiencies in real estate transactions would allow banks to increase 
the volume of transactions in ways not too dissimilar from how Rocket Mortgage has 
streamlined the mortgage application process.  
Adjacent to the land administration process is the private equity and real estate 
investment world. A world that has not adopted much new technology and which still relies on 
syndicators and manual processes to aggregate investors and purchase or sell property. Real 
estate investment trusts (REITs) were an attempt to streamline this process, but any efficiencies 
gained were offset by the fees charged by the REIT administrators. The Invesco QQQ ETF and 
similar indices drove fees down quite low for the equity investors but there is not an efficient 
way for an individual investor to gain access to a bundle of real estate assets, much less 
fractionalized ownership in a single property, without paying considerable fees.  
As assets become more liquid and available to a greater number of investors, all else 
being equal, that asset will increase in value due to the increased demand. The business case for 
tokenized real estate is quite clear and the use of blockchain in land administration is a parallel 
track in the process of innovating how we transfer value in the form of the world’s oldest asset 
class.  
 

--- Page 26 ---
 
17 
Research Question 
 
This research seeks to answer the following question: What political and technical 
obstacles are most likely to derail efforts to transition to a blockchain based land registry. In 
answering that question, the research serves as a manual and map through the minefield for those 
working to implement a blockchain based land registry systems  
The remaining chapters will unfold as follows. Chapter 2 will delve into the history of 
land reform and overview the literature of land reforms that enhanced property rights. Within 
Chapter 2, there will also be a review of the surprisingly ample literature surrounding blockchain 
land registries. Chapter 3 covers the political obstacles to implementing a blockchain land 
registry. As the reader will discover, it is the political obstacles that are most likely to derail a 
blockchain land registry project. Observations, firsthand experience demonstrating the political 
challenges and case studies of failed pilot programs are included within this chapter. Chapter 4 
covers technical obstacles to the implementation of a blockchain land registry. Many of the 
technical obstacles are intertwined with the political obstacles. For example, the decision 
whether to utilize a public blockchain or a private chain quickly becomes a political question 
with various parties preferring one or the other. As with the chapter on political obstacles, 
Chapter 4 includes survey data from professionals, firsthand experience, as well as first hand 
interviews with professionals in the field. Chapter 5 concludes with a discussion on the path 
forward for blockchain land registries. 

--- Page 27 ---
 
 
 
18 
CHAPTER 2 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF REFORM IN LAND ADMINISTRATION 
The literature review outlines previous studies on the connection between property rights 
and investment specifically around the land titling space where ownership security is increased 
by trusted land administration institutions. There is a diverse and expansive literature on property 
rights and land reforms in the realm of land administration. This paper will limit its scope to 
property rights involving real property and technologically focused land reforms in the area of 
titling and land registries. The first half of the literature review will also cover the history of land 
reform in India and the enclosure movement in Sweden as these two countries figure 
prominently in today’s blockchain land registry movement. The second half of the literature 
tackles the literature on blockchain land registries specifically.  
  
Property Rights are defined as control over the land itself and, if they exist, to enjoy the 
fruits of the land such as “the assets that are produced and improved” (Rodrik 2000, p. 4). Secure 
land rights are more broadly defined as a continuum of tenure security where the owner 
perceives that he or she will enjoy the benefits of ownership and there are limited chances of 
expropriation (Henley, 2013). In this context, expropriation is defined as confiscation of the real 
property or fruits of production by the state or other powerful entities. This leaves some room for 
more traditional and informal structures but not to the point at which the real property could be 
described as communal. The literature is divided into two main positions, authors who support 
the premise that increased property rights leads to increased investment and therefore greater 
societal well-being, and authors who are unconvinced of this connection. Empirical studies do 
not predominantly support either camp, but rather, fall between these two groups with the 

--- Page 28 ---
 
19 
preponderance of the evidence falling towards a positive effect on economic growth. The 
majority of those that are unconvinced of the connection are not claiming that an increase in 
property rights has a detrimental effect, but rather, that the evidence is mixed and is obscured by 
a litany of confounding variables that differ from place to place and culture to culture.   
In the seminal work produced by the UK Government’s Overseas Development Institute 
(ODI), Henley (2016) identifies three frameworks for examining the causal effects of increased 
property rights specifically on agricultural investment. While this work finds mixed effects on 
the benefits of private property rights, the authors cite several prominent proponents of property 
rights from the development literature. The first framework, the security effect, was originally 
posited by Besley and Ghatak (2009) and states that land owners invest more in their property 
and reap greater rewards when they have confidence that their land will not be expropriated and 
that they can keep the fruits of the land. The same authors provide the second framework, the 
gains from trade effect, investment will increase when efficient land markets allow for land 
owners to maximize their comparative advantage based on whatever factor of production they 
have in the most abundance. This second framework is of particular relevance in this paper since 
the title and property registry functions normally are studied alongside efficient land markets. 
The third framework, and most important for this research, is the collateralization effect put 
forward by Hernando De Soto. De Soto argues that land owners, who previously may have been 
unable to access the productive capacity of their largest asset, can use the title of their land as 
collateral for loans (De Soto, 2000).   
In the camp of authors that are more skeptical about the positive effects of property 
rights, the argument goes that existing property rights systems are a product of the culture and 

--- Page 29 ---
20 
institutions in which they are found and provide sufficient incentives for investment without the 
need for land reform or formalized property rights (Braselle et al., 2002 and Fenske, 2011). 
There is a logic to this argument, but the authors still provide evidence that land administration is 
significant in investment outcomes for a variety of investment types. Fenske (2011) admits that 
tenure is significantly linked to investment outcomes in regards to fallow plots and tree planting 
and only finds it insignificant as it pertains to investments in labor and fertilizer. Might it be that 
the labor practices are culturally engrained and may take many years to change? In this case, the 
land owner with capital to spare would likely choose to invest in other areas of productivity. And 
might limited access to fertilizer be a reason why a land owner with capital to expend would find 
a different avenue through which to increase his or her land’s productive capacity? Brasella et al. 
(2002) provide a clear and convincing criticism of the aforementioned relationship between land 
tenure security and investment by noting that there is an endogeneity problem with the majority 
of studies on the topic. It is possible that greater investment leads to a greater sense of security 
for a variety of reasons such as establishing facts on the ground or such that the community 
observes the investment and is more likely to support the land owners rights thereafter. This 
presents the most logical argument regarding the ambiguity of the causal arrow between these 
variables. Brasella and her colleagues might be right, but the vast majority of academics 
(Avramov et al., 2017; Barnes et al, 1999; Baum, 2017; Besley, 1995; Besley et al., 2000; 
Bethell, 1999; DeSoto, 2000; Gonzalez, 2005; Haydaroglu, 2015; Hayek, 1973; and Milgrom et 
al. 1990) conducting studies on this topic find a positive correlation and evidence for causation 
between secure land tenure and investment and make convincing arguments that the causality of 
this relationship begins with stronger property rights especially land tenure security. 

--- Page 30 ---
 
21 
Additionally, Brasella and her colleagues only looked at one country in their study which can 
hardly be considered representative.   
In another single country study that questions the causal arrow of property rights and 
development, Galiani and Schargrodsky (2010) found that property rights did lead to greater 
economic development, but not in the way that most authors within the literature find. They 
found that it was the increase in human capital that led to poverty reduction in the particular 
portion of the slums that enjoyed robust property rights. The authors did not do a good job 
parsing out the human capital variable to show that it is exogenous to other factors described 
previously. It does seem logical that investment in human capital would increase as the wealth of 
a neighborhood increases, and this would be a driver of poverty reduction. However, the authors 
overstep by claiming that the formalization of land and access to credit are not factors in this 
process. The natural experiment was not set up to effectively test access to credit or the 
utilization of land as collateral, and it seems likely that increased investment in human capital 
and increased access to credit are not mutually exclusive.     
There is a group of academics that do not see private property rights as an important 
variable in economic growth. They range from those that think that private property rights are 
overrated (Trebilcock, 2008), to those that think they are harmful in some situations (Glaeser et 
al 2004; Fogel 2004; Schmid 2006; Leeson and Harris, 2018). Schmid (2006) argues that 
uncertainty around property rights can actually be a driver of growth by unshackling 
entrepreneurs so that they are not too constrained by reimbursing property owners if their quest 
for innovation becomes a bit destructive. Schmid’s analysis looks at westward expansion in 19th 
century and finds that the lack of defined property rights created an environment for innovation. 

--- Page 31 ---
 
22 
There certainly was dynamic economic growth during this period and if the lack of property 
rights had anything to do with it, this finding does not travel as the opening up of millions of 
acres of nearly undisturbed land is a one off.   
The most convincing sub-strain in the literature that argues against the connection 
between property rights and growth is that made by Daron Acemoglu his 2005 article about 
institutions. He cautions that property rights can entrench the well-off at the expense of the poor 
by creating a rent-seeking class of property owners and a subservient class of impoverished 
renters (Acemoglu, 2005). While Acemoglu and his co-author Robinson are champions of 
property rights as can be seen in their most recent book, Why Nations Fail, they is most 
concerned about inclusive institutions. They would say that it is better to have private property 
rights than not, but we must ensure that institutions are inclusive and not merely the mechanism 
through which the educated and elites can concentrate more power. Advocates for private 
property rights should take pause here and realize that, just as free markets do not always 
“work,” private property rights are amoral and can lead to harmful externalities in some 
situations.   
Acemoglu and Robinson’s concerns about rent-seeking elites was taken to extremes in 
one of the more recently published articles on property rights. Leeson and Harris (2018) do not 
mince words in the title of their article; Wealth Destroying Private Property Rights. They argue 
that the decision to privatize the commons is made by elites, and when the elites have a stake in 
the social wealth generated by the commons, they make good decisions about when to privatize. 
However, when elites do not have a stake, they may choose to privatize the commons even if that 
decision leads to a destruction of social wealth. The authors in this instance look mostly at 

--- Page 32 ---
23 
African communal property and do not adequately account for issues of corruption and 
patronage that have coincided with many privatization schemes in Africa (Boone, 2007). With 
that said, they are correct that it is not entirely clear that all communal property should be 
privatized. There are valuable uses for the commons and institutions can be developed to 
administer them effectively (Ostrom, 2003).  
The majority camp posits that increased access to capital, security in the asset and 
formalization of the asset is the mechanism that boosts the economic productivity of the asset’s 
owner (DeSoto, 2000; Pejovich, 1990; Bethel, 1999; Hayek, 1973; Coase, 1998; North, 1973 & 
1991; Rodrick, 2004; Demarest, 2009; Clague et al., 1994; Leblang, 1996; Olsen, 1993; and 
Rand Corporation, 2009). Others ascribe the benefits of property rights to human capital 
investment, government investment in social services, or other tangential benefits.   
Leblang (1996) is laser focused on property rights as a driver of economic growth, but most 
others in this camp are equally concerned with other variables such as social norms, societal 
capital, geography, and history. One of the most thoughtful and oft cited scholars to engender 
this viewpoint is Jean-Philippe Platteau. In his book Institutions, Social Norms and Economic 
Development, he unpacks the variables that either support or degrade the effect of property rights 
on economic growth by their presence or lack thereof (Platteau, 2000). In a similar vein, 
Douglass North (1991) places a good deal of emphasis on institutions and the way they shape 
commerce and specifically, property markets. In addition to incomplete information, “transaction 
costs in political and economic markets make for inefficient property rights.” Further 
highlighting the role institutions play, Ronald Coase demonstrates in “The Problem of Social 
Cost” that institutions play an outsized role when transaction costs are high (Coase, 1960). While 

--- Page 33 ---
 
24 
North and Coase are referring to institutions more broadly, their observations include the 
institution of property rights. The importance of understanding transaction costs in politics and 
economics has proved enduring and will be revisited throughout this paper.   
One of the most well-known academics to champion property rights, and specifically 
land titling programs, is Hernando DeSoto who was mentioned in the abstract. In the opening 
pages of his seminal work, the Mystery of Capital, he describes the poor in developing countries 
by saying that “they have houses but not titles; crops but not deeds; businesses but not statutes of 
incorporation. It is the unavailability of these essential representations that explains why people 
who have adapted every other Western invention, from the paper clip to the nuclear reactor, have 
not been able to produce sufficient capital to make their domestic capitalism work” (DeSoto, 
2000, p. 49). One would be hard pressed to find a more concise statement about the need for 
property rights in the developing world. DeSoto’s influence and charisma has been behind most 
of the recent land reform in Peru and in many other countries as well. His team of researchers 
estimates that there is twenty trillion dollars of capital locked up in the land holdings of the poor 
in developing countries because there are significant issues with the titling of their land (DeSoto, 
2000). If they were able to gain access to a reliable titling system for their land, they could use 
this asset in the formal economy to generate wealth.  
In developed countries, the idea of property rights is so engrained in our social and legal 
fabric, that people are not quite sure what a world without those rights would look like. In fact, 
they likely have not thought to imagine such a world (DeSoto, 2000; World Bank, 2010). At this 
point, the institution of property rights, especially as those rights relate to land, has taken on a 
heuristic quality in that there is no need to think critically about something so logical. This is not 

--- Page 34 ---
 
25 
to say that there are not those in the West who argue for more communal property and less 
private property, but rather, that the knowledge about how the current institution of private 
property developed has been lost to our collective memory. Private property and sound land 
governance is one factor that has enabled Western countries to develop economically at such a 
blistering pace (DeSoto, 2000; Pejovich, 1990; Bethel, 1999; Hayek, 1973; Coase, 1998; North, 
1973; Leblang, 1996).  China’s meteoric rise presents a challenge to this theory at first glance. 
However, there are a few reasons why, after further inspection, the case China is less problematic 
to the theory. China abolished private property early on and in the cities in 1982, but then 
quickly changed tack and in 1994, allowed for 70-year leases of residential property and slightly 
shorter leases on commercial property (Clark, 2017). It remains to be seen what will happen as 
some of the leases begin to expire, but it is almost as if this is a face-saving measure as the 
Communist Party admits that private ownership and cultivation of property is essential to 
growth. It was in the 1990s and 2000s that China’s growth really took off with GDP growth 
averaging around ten percent per year for several years.  
The institutional quality of land governance and the surrounding rights is of paramount 
importance. The empirical studies described above show that cadaster, a word of French origin 
that describes land registries, and land administration systems cannot be copied and pasted from 
the developed world onto the developing world because of the unique social and historical 
traditions in each country and the lack of institutional memory for such a system. The legal 
institution of property rights that supports an efficient land market does not fit into the “more 
formal and indigenous rights to land found especially in developing countries where tenures are 
predominantly social rather than legal” (World Bank, 2010).  

--- Page 35 ---
 
26 
Another difference between developed land administration systems and developing ones 
stems from transaction costs. Elucidated by the great and aforementioned Ronald Coase (1960), 
transaction costs can include market research, enforcement of property rights, and bargaining 
costs. An enlightening study conducted by Harvard academics in an impoverished area of Peru 
elucidated one of the nuanced aspects of land tenure reform. The study found that government 
titling drives did not necessarily increase access to credit when the funds are sought from a 
private lender but it did for public lenders (Field and Torero, 2006). However, they did find that 
homeowners with titles are 10% more likely to “have undertaken housing improvements in the 
last two years prior to the survey” and that “titled households are 15% more likely to finance 
improvements through formal loans” (Field and Torero, 2006). The land title availability did 
increase access to credit from public lending institutions, but for access to capital to make a 
demonstrable effect on a community, private lending must also be part of the equation. The main 
reason the authors gave for this lack of private lending was that of transaction costs. The cost of 
collateral processing, confirmation of title, foreclosure, and resale are immense relative to the 
small size of the loans requested by many of the urban poor. This issue of transaction costs is not 
one that should be quickly overlooked as it can be a major driver in “credit rationing” in 
developing countries (Coase, 1960; Field and Torero, 2006). The authors tackle another 
interesting challenge by teasing out the effects on demand for credit from the effects on supply of 
credit. We agree that it is an interesting academic inquiry to understand the nuance between the 
effects of property titling on supply and demand of credit, but it is even more interesting and 
relevant to get at how the process of increasing access to credit can be improved through 
technological advances in land titling. 

--- Page 36 ---
27 
The World Bank Report on Land Administration and Governance provides several 
examples, mostly from the developing world, in which corruption in land administration and 
governance have derailed development. For example, they note that in places like Kenya, India, 
Tanzania, Ethiopia and Bangladesh, to name but a few, corruption within land administration and 
governance is a major obstacle to economic growth (World Bank, 2010). In Honduras, around 
80% of land held by private individuals is either untitled or incorrectly titled (Collindres et al., 
2016). To make matters worse, a 2015 audit of the Honduran land titling entity uncovered more 
than 700 irregularities, most of which were related to “criminal acts of corruption” (Collindres et 
al., 2016). The system is highly politicized in that elected officials change titles for key 
supporters or refuse to enforce the titles of political opponents. In India, it is estimated that 66% 
of all civil cases in the court systems involve disputes over land (Thomason Reuters Foundation, 
2016). Millions of these cases are currently awaiting adjudication in the backlogged Indian court 
system. It is estimated that the lack of land rights in India is a greater cause of poverty than 
illiteracy and the caste system (Kanojia, 2015).  Because India and Sweden play an outsized role 
in the brief history of blockchain land administration reform efforts, the following section is a 
deep dive into the history of land reform in India. This section will be followed by a deep dive 
into the history of land reform in Sweden.  
The History of Land Reform in India 
India is an interesting case because the British did not establish a uniform land 
administration system throughout the regions under their control. Rather, the land administration 
system was based on when that particular region was brought under British control and the 

--- Page 37 ---
 
28 
impression that the British administrators had of the previous Mughal era land administration 
systems (Banerjee & Iyer, 2005). The systems that developed are classified as landlord-based 
land administration, individual cultivator land administration, and village land administration. 
The landlords were given quotas on property taxes that were to be paid to the British and they 
were at liberty to tax their tenants accordingly (Banerjee & Iyer, 2005). In the individual 
cultivator model, individual landowners paid the British directly. As a result of this arrangement, 
the regions in which the individual cultivator model was utilized saw the establishment of robust 
property rights and the completion of thorough land surveys for a cadaster. Similar efforts were 
not need in the village or landlord model because the property tax responsibility was aggregated 
to the top for the entire area and therefore it mattered little where one plot began and another 
ended.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 38 ---
 
29 
 
Figure 4. Indian Land Registry Map 
After independence, India states were granted constitutional authority to enact land 
reforms independently (Besley and Burgess, 2000). As a result, there is variation in policy from 
state to state. This variation provides for public policy experimentation and creates an excellent 
environment for empirical analysis. Beasley and Burgess divided state-level land reforms into 
four categories; (class 1) regulating tenancy contracts, (class 2) abolishing intermediaries, (class 
3) land redistribution and ceilings on landholdings, and (class 4) reforms that attempted to 
consolidate “disparate landholdings” (Besley and Burgess, 2000). While the goal of these 
reforms was poverty alleviation, there is not much consensus in the academic literature as to 

--- Page 39 ---
 
30 
whether or not they were successful. There is some consensus that reforms that abolished 
intermediaries had positive effects on the poor and increased tenure security (Wadley & Derr, 
1990).   
The states with active blockchain based land registry programs are Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Goa, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana so 
rather than list land reforms in all Indian states, the following paragraphs focus exclusively on 
these eight. Telangana will be included with Andhra Pradesh as Telangana was part of Andhra 
Pradesh state until 2014.   
The area that is now Andhra Pradesh was administered under both the landlord-based 
land administration system and the individual cultivator land administration (Banerjee & Iyer, 
2005). Land reforms there began as early as a few months after the Indian Constitution was 
ratified in November of 1949. In 1950, the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly passed the 
Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act that protected tenants and provided them with a minimum 
tenancy term (Besley and Burgess, 2000). The most interesting and effective reforms came in the 
mid-1950s when five class 2 (abolishing intermediaries) land reforms were passed. In 1952, the 
Jagirs system, akin to feudalism in medieval Europe, was abolished. The other four acts followed 
in quick succession abolishing all kinds of feudal style land grants that were given to Jagirs and 
Inams which freed up 11,137 estates and eliminated nearly 1000 Jagirs and many more Inams 
(Besley and Burgess, 2000). Andhra Pradesh is now continuing in this line of effort by 
implementing blockchain property technology (prop tech) for the purpose of eliminating 
intermediaries and middle-men.  Previously these middle-men performed tasks that could be 

--- Page 40 ---
31 
easily digitized and automated thereby saving time, money, and layers of bureaucracy in which 
graft and fraud could proliferate.  
The British administered land in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh, near New Delhi, through the 
Village System and therefore the need for abolishing a landlord-based system was not as 
prevalent. Instead, Haryana’s land reform centered around tenancy reform. In 1953 and 1955, the 
Haryana Legislative Assembly passed the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act and the Pepsu 
Tenancy and Agricultural Land Act respectively (Besley and Burgess, 2000). This legislation 
provided for tenure security for landowners who cultivated plots of less than fifteen acres. Uttar 
Pradesh passed land reforms of all four varieties (classes 1, 2, 3, and 4). The literature gives the 
impression that land tenure struggles were not as acute in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh as they 
were in Andhra Pradesh.   
Madhya Pradesh, and West Bengal, both regions previously administered under the 
landlord system, passed reforms mainly of class 1 and 2, regulating tenancy and abolishing 
intermediaries. West Bengal passed class 3 and 4 reforms as well, (class 3) land redistribution 
and ceilings on landholdings, and (class 4) reforms that attempted to consolidate “disparate 
landholdings” (Besley and Burgess, 2000).  
Maharashtra, having been administered by the British under the individual land owner 
system, had less of a need to dispatch the middle-men and landlords, so its reforms were of class 
1 and 3; tenancy reform and land redistribution. These occurred in the 1950s along with the 
reforms from many of the other states listed.   
Goa was ruled by the Portuguese until 1961 and therefore their history of land reforms is 
of a different track. They were under a mixed system in which the Portuguese assigned land to 

--- Page 41 ---
 
32 
landlords similar to parts of India. Upon independence, the Goa Legislative Assembly passed 
land reforms of the class 1 variety, tenancy reforms (Colvalkar, 2017).  The point in describing 
land reforms state by state is to underscore the nuance present in the process of Indian land 
reform. Despite this nuance, there are generalizations to be made.   
 
In a recent paper published by the India Institute, Chandra and Rangarajun (2017) 
describe a labyrinth of legacy systems that hinder efficient land markets in India. India has two 
different systems of land administration, land records and land registrations, administered by the 
Department of Revenue and the Department of Stamps and Registration respectively. The 
authors note high levels of uncertainty and the practice of paying bribes to patwari (village 
accountant) in order to get transactions process (Chandra and Rangarajun, 2017). These 
challenges prevent small landowners from accessing credit and drives up the interest rates on 
mortgages. Another challenge is that most land records are not digitized. In Andhra Pradesh for 
example, only around half of the hard copy land records are in legible condition (Behra, 2009). 
The lack of digitization of land records is a large impediment to a blockchain based solution, but 
India has rapidly expanded the percentage of digitized land records at the time of publishing.    
The actual process of buying and selling land is different depending on the state, but 
Chandra and Rangarajun have distilled the process into a more generalizable form. They outline 
a seventeen-step process that can take three to four months to complete. Because the transaction 
costs of land markets are an area of focus for this paper, it is worth summarizing the seventeen 
steps:  

--- Page 42 ---
 
33 
1. A property owner desires to sell her property 2. The seller finds an agent and agrees to terms  
3. The agent check the land records 4. The property is put on the market 5. The buyer goes to the 
bank and receives a loan commitment.  6. The buyer that is the highest bidder reconfirms credit 
with their bank. 7. The bank conducts due diligence similar to that done by the agent initially.  8 
The bank approves the loan.  9. The agent confirms with the bank that the buyer has the loan.  
10. The agent arranges for the signing of four identical copies of the contract.  11. The contract is 
sent to the buyer’s bank.  12. The bank sends credit documents to the buyer.  13. The buyer sends 
the signed loan agreement back to the bank.  14. The bank receives the loan documents.  15. The 
bank initiates payment to the seller.  16. The sale deed is signed and the transfer of property is 
registered with the land department.  17. Commissions are paid to the agents (Chandra and 
Rangarajun, 2017).   
The process is differs mostly in structure rather than substance from property transaction 
in OECD countries, but the lack of digitization of title, contract, and deed documents creates a 
lethargic process. The authors observe some specific problems, though, that are unique to India. 
The Land department does not get involved with active measures until step sixteen. There is an 
opacity to the system that requires everyone to constantly check and confirm what other parties 
have already spent time looking into. A property market in which transactions can take up to four 
months can hardly be described as fluid. In the Indian Government’s Blockchain Report of 2019, 
they list land registries as one of the foremost areas of innovation in which blockchain can bring 
efficiency gains (Nasscom, 2019). 
 
The Enclosure Movement in Sweden 

--- Page 43 ---
34 
There is a limited literature written in English on Swedish land reform, but it is clear that 
most academics place great emphasis on the three major land reforms on the past few centuries: 
storskifte (Great Partition) in 1757, enskiftet in 1803, and lagaskifte in 1827 (Skalos et al., 2012). 
The storskifte, or Great Partition, was the brainchild of Jacob Faggot, the director of the Swedish 
Land Survey Board (Helmfrid, 1961). His inspiration was likely the agrarian revolution in 
England but the needs in Sweden were unique due to the idea of the “village community.” The 
village community system allotted an equal amount of land to each farmer in the village but, in 
order to ensure equity, the farmer received several different plots in various locations, and of 
various quality, around the village (Helmfrid, 1961). The Storskifte reform aimed to eliminate 
the inefficiency in the village community system by giving farmers single continuous plots to 
cultivate. Opposition to the reform meant that very few villages enacted it with vigor, and many 
not at all.  
By 1783, farmers were able to request that their land be removed from the village 
community and enclosed. This process, known as “enskifte” was successful and formalized 
through legislation by 1807. In a continuation of this process, the “lagaskifte” Act of 1827 
“permitted more than one piece of land per farm, so that each farm got its part of the old 
common forest and pasture land, a piece of meadowland and one piece of arable land” 
(Helmfrid, 1961). The “lagaskifte” Act rolled back some of the more radical and forceful aspects 
of the enskifte and provided for greater acceptance of the reforms among community-oriented 
farmers. In the decades after these reforms were implemented, it is estimated that Sweden’s 
cultivated land area tripled in size “from 0.8 million hectares in 1800 to 2.5 million hectares in 
1860” (Helmfrid, 1961).    

--- Page 44 ---
 
35 
It is clear that Swedish academics have found evidence that agricultural production was 
higher for land that was owned by the farmer himself, a “freeholder,” than it was for land owned 
by nobles or the clergy (Olssen and Svensson, 2010). The 19th Century saw an increase in the 
proportion of arable land, mostly in southern Sweden, that was owned by freeholders. Olssen and 
Svensson conclude that property rights provided the foundation for increased investment and the 
industrialization process.  
The modern Land Code was established in 1970 and updated in a reform in 1973 when 
Sweden became the first country to adopt a computerized land registry (Jensen, n.d.). This 
reform came just a few years after extraordinary growth in Sweden’s GPD per capita that was 
matched only by Japan in the century from 1850 – 1950 (Schön, 2008). Sweden’s current climate 
in regards to property rights is a mixture between strong institutions that enforce property rights 
and recent legislation designed to protect tenants at the expense of landowners. There is a 
tradition of legal positivism in Sweden that is quite different from common law systems that 
many anglophile nations are accustomed to (Jensen, n.d.).   
The main body responsible for land administration is the Lantmäteriet, in English the 
Swedish National Land Survey. This organization has three divisions; the Cadastral Services 
Division, the Land Registration Division, and the Geodata Division (Lantmäteriet Annual 
Report, 2016). It was the Lantmäterie, in partnership with Chromaway (a blockchain company), 
that conducted the initial pilots for a Swedish blockchain based land registry. One of the many 
reasons the Lantmäterie enthusiastically adopted the idea of blockchain based land registries is 
because the organization itself is modern and digitized, but the processes in place for the sale and 
transfer of land are outdated and the Lantmäterie is not brought into the process until “long after 

--- Page 45 ---
 
36 
the contracts are signed” (Lantmäterie, 2017). Despite the outdated processes, Sweden is leagues 
ahead of developing countries and even many OECD countries in regards to an efficient and 
trusted marketplace for land transactions.   
 
Blockchain Land Registry Literature 
As one might expect with such a novel concept, there are but a few strains in the 
blockchain based land registry literature. The first group to write on the subject were 
technologists and academics with some level of tech enthusiasm who foresee myriad applications 
for blockchain technology in the social sciences (Casey & Vigna 2018; Collindres et al. 2016; 
Kaczorowska, 2019; Scott, 2016; and Snall 2017). There is another strain in the literature that 
can be described as the “not yet” group (Vos 2017; and Lemieux 2016). These authors recognize 
the potential of blockchain in land administration but feel that the technology is not mature 
enough to replace legacy systems of land registration. The last strain in the literature are those 
that feel blockchain technology is not the right fit for land administration (Barbieri and Gassen, 
2017). The following arguments posited by the various subgroups in the literature were on 
display at the 2017 and 2019 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty in Washington, D.C.  
The enthusiasts argue that blockchain technology in land registries has the potential to 
open up the credit market for those who would normally not have access (Scott, 2016), curb 
corruption (Collindres et al., 2016), and minimize transaction costs (Casey and Vigna, 2018). 
These are all theoretically feasible but are not without obstacles. To dwell on the obstacle, 
though, is to miss the potential upsides of a successful implementation of a blockchain based 
land registry. The economic vitality and productivity of the world’s poor are severely hampered 

--- Page 46 ---
 
37 
by informal property arrangements and their inability to access credit markets (DeSoto, 2000). 
While the benefits are not as drastic, land management in OECD countries could also see a 
substantial lessening of transaction friction and efficiency. A blockchain based land registry that 
made records transparent to all citizens could reduce transaction costs and establish a function 
market for immovable property. USAID did a study in Uganda in which they found that the land 
of those who were secure in the property rights was 63% more productive than those who had a 
fear of eviction (USAID, 2016). No doubt there is room to critique how they measured the 
increase in productivity, but it is telling that organizations like USAID and the World Bank have 
been some of the first to champion innovation in the property registry space. Kaczorowska put it 
well in her 2019 paper when she said, “it is expected that the future stage of development of land 
registers will be the application of blockchain technology which shall revolutionize the land 
registration process” (Kaczorowska, 2019).  
As described previously, the second strain in the literature represents a group that is more 
cautious than optimistic about the prospect of using blockchain as a tool in land administration. 
They observe that there are many avenues through which to implement a blockchain based 
system, and many questions that must be answered prior to an implementation. In the technical 
realm, these academics and practitioners debate whether or not the land registry should be placed 
on a public platform like Bitcoin or a private platform like the one that the Austin-based startup 
Factom attempted in Honduras. A public blockchain platform would provide “proof of work” 
checks that enhance immutability of the blockchain, but the transaction costs are high. Public 
blockchain transactions require 5,000 times more energy than a Visa credit card transaction 
(Barbieri and Gassen, 2017). This would appear not to be a problem since there might only be a 

--- Page 47 ---
 
38 
few thousand real estate transaction per day in a given country, but with electricity and energy 
costs high in developing countries, this is a dissuasive factor. Put another way, a blockchain 
network that process 300,000 transactions per day would require a similar amount of energy that 
is consumed in a small country in that same twenty-four-hour period (Vos, 2017). The process 
that is so time and energy intensive is the “proof of work” process. While proof of work 
enhances the security and immutability of the system, it requires complicated mathematical 
computations along with majority consensus algorithms that require a good bit of computing 
power.   
In 2017, when Vos presented his paper at the World Bank Conference on Land and 
Poverty, the only alternative was a tradeoff between system security and massive amounts of 
computing power. If one wanted to design a system that required less computing power and 
therefore less energy, one could utilize a private blockchain or use a different type of consensus 
mechanism, but this arrangement would provide less system security. Several blockchain 
protocols now provide transaction speeds in the hundreds of thousands per second. For example 
Hedera, a Texas based blockchain company, provides a solution to the energy consumption issue 
described above by allowing secure transactions at over 500,000 transactions per second (Baird 
et al., 2018). The author met with Mance Harmon, CEO of Hedera, this fall and he (Mance) 
demonstrated how the Hedera Hashgraph platform increases speed through a process called 
Gossip and Sharding These concepts are explained further in the Hedera Whitepaper (Baird et 
al., 2018). Several other platforms like The Linux Foundation’s Hyperledger Fabric, EOS, 
Ripple, and the Bitcoin Lighting Network have overcome the speed issues present by Vos and 
Barbieri & Gassen. 

--- Page 48 ---
 
39 
The third strain in the literature consists of academics and practitioners who feel that 
blockchain applied to land administration is not the right fit. Barbieri and Gassen (2017) are the 
most critical of the arrangement proposed by blockchain enthusiasts. While they recognize the 
economic hindrance caused by the fact that “of the 7.3 billion people in the world, only two 
billion have title that is legal and effective," they are fairly skeptical that blockchain will be the 
avenue through which these property owners formalize their property holdings (Barbieri and 
Gassen, 2017).  Their primary concern is that a public blockchain network is not secure enough 
from cyber-attacks, and a private blockchain network, while more secure, forgoes many of the 
benefits inherent with a distributed ledger that make blockchain attractive in the first place.   
Other issues raised by the authors include; seismic shifts in political power, the risk of lost 
cryptographic keys, re-encryption challenges, energy consumption, and data accumulation 
issues. These are all valid concerns, but the concerns are no more or less, just different, than the 
concerns with the current systems in place in many developing countries. First of all, their 
concern about seismic political shifts is irrelevant because no cadastre or land management 
system, blockchain included, can protect against a totalitarian takeover or the predations of a 
roving bandit to use Mancur Olson’s terminology. If the state is captured by a despot, he can just 
as easily confiscate the real property of his people whether the property records are listed in a 
centralized database, on paper, or on a blockchain based ledger.   
I question the logic of their concerns about lost cryptographic keys as well. Might it not 
be equally possible that the government entity responsible for land administration could 
misplace, damage, or corrupt a file that holds land registry information? At least in the 
blockchain scenario, the person who has the most interest in the property, the owner, is the one 

--- Page 49 ---
40 
responsible for keeping their cryptographic key in a safe place rather than a bureaucrat with no 
dog in the fight. Furthermore, it is not as if someone who misplaces their cryptographic key will 
immediately be evicted from their land. On the contrary, no one else will have the key either and 
hence there is no way for a false claimant to enter the picture. In a situation where there is no 
proof of ownership under the current centralized storage system, a false claimant could hire an 
unscrupulous lawyer to draft a forged document and a legal battle over ownership would ensure 
(under the best of conditions, under the worst, there would be bloodshed). In the same situation 
under a blockchain based land registry, a false claimant would have no way to claim ownership 
since they would not be able to produce the cryptographic key. What is more, there are ways to 
store cryptographic keys in digital wallets that can be accessed with a variety of authentication 
methods. Perhaps the Aadhaar unique identification number in India would be a way for people 
without internet access to prove their identity, and therefore ownership of their digital wallet, 
biometrically at the land administration office.  
The scenario described above heightens the need for strong network security to ensure 
that keys are not stolen in a hacking attack. This concern has the most merit out of all of their 
concerns. If 51% of a public blockchain network’s miners and nodes reach consensus about 
some data point, then that data is secured into the blockchain as truth (Nakamoto, 2009). 
Therefore in a public blockchain, if one group can amass 51% of the miners and nodes to initiate 
some nefarious transaction, then the system has been compromised. While it is extremely 
unlikely that one group could do this since it is in the interest of the other blockchain miners and 
nodes to maintain a truthful ledger, it is possible. Most blockchain pilots have been conducted on 
hybrid or private blockchain networks rather than the public sort. The Hedera platform retains 

--- Page 50 ---
41 
the benefits of a public blockchain but has the security of a private blockchain since it is 
overseen by a distributed council of respected intermediaries. The best analogy I can think of for 
this is that it is like the difference between direct democracy and the representative sort. Direct 
democracy is like a normal public blockchain in that it is prone to populism and demagoguery, 
while representative democracy retains many of the benefits of direct democracy but with more 
stability.   
The last issue that will be addressed from the literature in the “never blockchain” camp is 
the argument that data accumulation makes blockchain too cumbersome to be used in land 
registries. It is true that blockchains steadily accumulate data since all of the data must remain as 
a whole rather than transmission of the limited, pertinent data in a transaction (Barbieri and 
Gassen, 2017). However, the Bitcoin network is continuing to operate with a quarter of a million 
transactions per day at time of writing. Most countries experience property transaction numbers 
in the thousands or hundreds of thousands at most and blockchain technology has quickly 
overcome the transaction speed limitations present in early blockchain platforms. Another way to 
ease this problem is to maintain a blockchain based land registry alongside a centralized 
database. The blockchain network might contain digital signatures and proof of ownership and 
hashes of files that are normally found in cadasters like land use plans, deeds, GIS overlays, 
regulations issued by the courts and any other overlays needed to complete the picture. This is 
known as storing things off-chain. In other words, the entire GIS overlay does not need to be 
placed on the blockchain network as that would be an unsustainable amount of data 
accumulation. The hash of the GIS overlay, though, could be easily placed on the blockchain. 
That way anyone looking at the overlay could quickly determine if it had been tampered with. If 

--- Page 51 ---
 
42 
you recall in Chapter 1 of this paper, hashing was discussed in detail. To briefly recap, full 
copies of all information can be stored off chain with hashes and metadata that are on chain 
pointing back to the source documents. We can be sure that no one has changed even a comma, 
or GIS data, in these documents because if something even as small as a comma or a single digit 
were changed, the hash would change dramatically (see Figures 1 and 2).  
In the following chapter, the technical challenges to blockchain for land administration 
will be examined in more detail along with some variables and indicators that may be helpful for 
practitioners in the field.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 52 ---
 
43 
CHAPTER 3  
OVERCOMING THE TECHNICAL OBSTACLES TO A BLOCKCHAIN REGISTRY 
Methodology 
This research is interdisciplinary in nature as it pulls from political science, technology, 
and business. For this reason, various research methods are employed to tackle the research 
question including; a survey, qualitative interviews, analysis of public policy guidelines, factor 
modeling, and elementary design science research.  
 
The research is intended to help both practitioners and public policy experts better craft 
pilots and products for implementation as these efforts are almost always partnerships between 
the public and private sector. There are distinct limits to the applicability of this research as each 
jurisdiction is unique and there are numerous political and technical variables to consider. By 
focusing on political and technical obstacles to implementation, this research can serve as a 
jumping off point for future quantitative research that attempts to control for specific variables. 
The data for a purely quantitative study is not publicly available and, even if it were available, it 
would be deficient in sample size.  
A variety of technical reason have been posited as to why blockchains will never be 
suitable for the public sector and specifically for blockchain land registries including: “hardforks, 
the immutability of the ledger, pseudonymity of transactions, exposure of personal data, the 
scalability of the technology and price volatility” (Konashevych, 2020). Another obstacle that 
straddles the technical and political space is that only a third of countries have fully digitized 
land registries (Currier, 2020). As mentioned previously in the literature review, academics such 

--- Page 53 ---
 
44 
as Barbieri and Gassen (2017), Androulaki et al. (2013) and, to a lesser extent, Vos (2017) and 
Lemieux (2016) have concerns about blockchain’s technical capacity for land registries. Vos and 
Lemieux, as suggested in the literature review, are more in the “not yet” camp, but they wrote on 
the topic several years ago which is quite a long time in the world of technological innovation. 
This chapter will cover the objects of the authors listed above, and will argue that, relative to the 
political obstacles, the technical obstacles to implementation can be easily overcome with proper 
design and the right technology partners. Furthermore, this chapter will discuss the survey that 
the author conducted of land professionals. Granted, technical obstacles such as hardforks and 
data pseudonymity are overcome by using technology stacks that require tradeoffs. In other 
words, the Bitcoin blockchain, the original public, permissionless chain, is hampered by all of 
the limitations listed above, but achieves the greatest level of decentralization, accountability, 
and transparency. As the technology stack is changed to avoid the limitations of a purely 
public/permissionless chain, the benefits of a blockchain system begin to diminish in a more or 
less linear fashion. Creative combinations of public blockchains, digital identity solutions, and 
some tradeoffs provide policy makers with an array of options for their technology solutions. 
These combinations will be discussed more later, but first we must define the technical 
limitations listed above.  
 
Public, permissionless blockchains like Bitcoin and Ethereum use proof of work 
consensus mechanism that require a great deal of energy and necessitate limited numbers of 
transactions per second.1 At the time of writing, the Bitcoin blockchain sees about seven 
 
1 Ethereum 2.0 will use proof of stake which will solve some of the scaling problems.  

--- Page 54 ---
 
45 
transactions per second (TPS), most of which are pure crypto transfer transactions. Bitcoin can 
be thought of as digital gold in that it is a store of value with intentionally limited possibilities for 
applications to be built on it. Despite the existence of layer two solutions to the slow TPS issues 
such as the Lightning Network that use “bidirectional payment channels without delegating 
custody of funds” (Popper, 2017), the vast majority of governments have steered clear of 
utilizing the Bitcoin blockchain for their land registry pilots. The transaction speed is one issue 
but, more importantly, governments do not trust the Bitcoin blockchain given the bitcoin 
community’s ethos of avoiding government censorship and oversight. What appears to be a 
technical barrier, slow transaction speeds, is more of a political barrier meaning that 
governments have preconceived distrust of bitcoin due to media narratives and other biases.  
 
Hard forks create another technical barrier to public, permissionless chains. Public 
blockchains like Bitcoin and Ethereum have “forked” in the past. In short, a fork occurs when 
some developers and users disagree about the best way to handle a controversial event. Because 
these chains are distributed without a central authority, there is no way to compel all of the 
developers and users to say install an updated version of the protocol or roll back transactions 
due to a hack. This is problematic for land registries because it could mean that, in the very 
unlikely event of a hard fork, there could exists two separate version of the registry. One would 
be on the original chain and the other on the forked chain. While this is uncommon and can be 
mitigated, it creates yet another barrier for public permissionless chains to be used in land 
administration.  

--- Page 55 ---
46 
While IT infrastructure and tech stack redevelopment budgets may seem technical in 
nature, these will be discussed in the political obstacles as it is the political will to stomach these 
costs that generates the barrier.  
There are three primary ways, none of which are mutually exclusive, that technologists 
and land registry professionals have sought to overcome the aforementioned technical 
challenges. The first is utilizing private blockchains, the second is what many call the hybrid 
approach, and the third is utilizing hashing, a component of blockchain, to increase registry 
integrity.  
Many pilot programs, observing the technical challenges with public blockchains, opted 
to utilize private, permissioned blockchains instead. Permissioned blockchains are distributed but 
have a central administrator that acts as the gatekeeper for the users of various applications on 
the chain. While this arrangement abrogates the need for a proof of work consensus mechanism, 
it is not as transparent or secure. There are distinct advantages for governments though. On 
private blockchains governments, accustomed to setting the rules, are able to fashion the network 
in a way that is suitable for them. They can set parameters around who can utilize the system and 
they retain the ability to edit transactions albeit in full view of the other nodes. Private 
blockchains are popular for pilot programs but rarely does one see a pilot move to full scale 
implementation. Conversations with practitioners at firms like ChromaWay and Medici Land 
Governance confirmed that despite the technical advantages, private blockchains are unable to 
deliver on the ethos and hype surrounding blockchain transparency, security, and immutability. 
In short, the very reason that private blockchains are more attractive to governments makes them 
unable to live up to the promise of the technology. Ironically, the private blockchain land 

--- Page 56 ---
 
47 
administration systems offer few advantages over traditional land administration software 
making the costs difficult to justify. The functionality of private blockchains can be bolstered by 
interoperability with public chains but this is not yet common.  
 
 The hybrid approach took off in 2020 when it was clear that the majority of pilot 
programs were not moving towards full scale implementation. Rohan Bennet, Todd Miller, Mark 
Pickering and Al-Karim Kara coined the phrase “hybrid approach” in relation to blockchain for 
land administration in their article Hybrid Approaches for Smart Contracts in Land 
Administration: Lessons from Three Blockchain Proofs-of-Concept published in Land in 2021. It 
is the opinion of this author that their paper, or at least their lessons learned, will become a 
seminal work in this burgeoning subfield of land administration research. Their chief insight is 
that “a hybrid solution that mixes smart contract use with existing technology infrastructure – 
enabling preservation of the role of a land registry agency” is the best solution for overcoming 
objections from various stakeholders (Bennett, 2021, p. 1). This approach allows for blockchain 
and smart contracts to be inserted in the portion of the land transfer process in which it can 
generate the most value for stakeholders and eschews systemwide transformations.   
 
One of the more salient technical concerns is related to the digitization of land 
administration records. Just over a third of countries have fully digitized land records (Shang and 
Price, 2018). However, in the survey discussed below 87% of respondents stated that more than 
half of their land records are digitized. While close to one third of all countries have a fully 
digitized land administration system, the majority have made significant progress towards 
digitizing their land records and the percentage is sure to grow each year.  
 

--- Page 57 ---
 
48 
The Survey 
 
The survey, which collected responses from land registry professional across the world, 
was conducted in 2020 in partnership with the International Association for Trusted Blockchain 
Applications (INATBA). Respondents were concentrated in Europe were INATBA has a strong 
base of member organizations but they included respondents from Central Asia, South Asia, and 
Latin America. There was not a discernable pattern between those who responded to the survey 
and those who did not. Respondents came from a geographically diverse subset of the total and 
the respondents came from countries of varying wealth and economic development. Respondents 
hailed from regions ranging from central Europe to Latin America and countries ranging from 
Australia to India. Despite efforts to expand the number of respondents, only fifteen land registry 
professionals responded to the survey out of an initial group of sixty. While the number of 
respondents was low, the information gleaned still assists in the elucidation of the state of 
blockchain based land registry efforts. The respondents were fairly well geographically 
distributed and about a third came from low-income countries, a third from middle income 
countries and a third from high income countries. A snapshot of the results can be seen on Table 
1. Respondents were asked about the various obstacles to the adoption of a blockchain based 
land registry with the option to select neither, technical, political, or both. There were fifteen 
total respondents to the survey but not all of them answered the technical and political obstacles 
questions.  
Table 1. Technical vs. Political Obstacles  
 
Foresaw Technical Obstacles 
Foresaw Political Obstacles 
Low Income N=3 
66% 
100% 

--- Page 58 ---
 
49 
Middle Income N=3 
66% 
33% 
High Income N=2 
0% 
100% 
 
 
 
 
While the number of respondents is insufficient to draw conclusions in isolation, this 
information combined with the case studies of the various pilot programs across the developed 
and developing world provides valuable insight. 77% of respondents stated that they were 
familiar with blockchain technology. When asked about the obstacles to adopting blockchain in 
their land administration office, the technical obstacles were selected by 44% of respondents 
while the political obstacles were cited by 78% of respondents. The number is greater than 100% 
since respondents were permitted to select more than one and some selected both. It is interesting 
that the respondents from high income countries felt that there would be no technical obstacles to 
establishing a blockchain land registry but that the legal and political obstacles would be 
formidable. It is possible that, given the larger budgets in high income countries, the technical 
obstacles would present less of a challenge since a land office could secure services from outside 
technology firms that may be unavailable to land offices in low-income countries. When asked, 
who would most likely oppose a blockchain land registry, one of the respondents from India 
thought it would be “Politicians and bureaucrats [since] this is one area where corruption exists 
and blockchains will remove middlemen. Middlemen are created by politicians in the system to 
bring back money to their table. Blockchains will eradicate and can remove redundancy and 
duplication of data. land records are forged sometimes for political gains. So, advocating [for] 
this will be a challenge.”  

--- Page 59 ---
 
50 
 
Another interesting factor is that the survey respondents are all civil servants or 
politically appointed land administration officials. Bureaucratic officials are not know for 
innovation. In fact, research has found that “public managers working in politicized 
administrations and those whose education includes a law degree exhibit lower pro-innovation 
attitudes” (Lapuente and Suzuki, 2020). Interestingly, land administration offices are often filled 
with people with law degrees. These survey respondents are not prone to innovation so a 
blockchain based land registry is likely to be more feasible than is estimated by civil servants 
who are unlikely to have incentives to innovate. Public sector innovation tends to lag private 
sector innovation. Blackrock and JP Morgan Chase are already tokenizing money market funds 
using blockchain and several commercial buildings have been tokenized using blockchain. Of 
course, the ownership is tokenized through an LLC where the token holders all hold a percentage 
of the LLC equity. For example, if there are one thousand tokens that make up the cap table of 
the LLC that owns a building, someone who owns ten tokens would own 1% of the building. In 
fact, Larry Fink, the CEO of Blackrock, the largest asset manager in the world is on the record 
saying, “I really do believe this is where we're going to be going. We have the technology to 
tokenize today." The private sector does not need the public sector to move forward with 
blockchain technology. The profit incentive drives the private sector to innovate more quickly 
than the public sector. This is further evidence that the technical obstacles are not the main issue 
preventing land administration offices from adopting blockchain technology.  
 
This research was also informed by firsthand interviews with professionals working in 
blockchain for land administration. The interviewees were selected based on their involvement in 
pilot projects. Examples of interviewees include people in positions such as Director of Business 

--- Page 60 ---
 
51 
Development at Medici Land Governance and Vice President of Operations at Chromaway. The 
qualitative type for these interviews was unstructured due to the fact that these interviews were 
conducted both virtually, and in an ad hoc manner at conferences. The method was a 
combination of observation and focus groups. The focus group contained mid-level managers at 
many of the technology implementation partners for the pilot programs.  
 
The technical obstacles to establishing a blockchain land registry are insignificant when 
compared to the political and entrenched interest obstacles. In Chapter 4, brief summaries of 
various pilot programs from both the developing and developed world will be presented. These 
studies further confirm the theory that incumbent firms and elected officials would rather 
publicly site technical obstacles to the adoption of a blockchain based land system rather than 
reveal their true motivations.  
 
An Index of Suitability for Blockchain in Land Administration 
In an effort to apply data analysis to the question of which countries possess an 
environment conducive to the implementation of a blockchain land registry, the following index 
was developed. The index measures variables from one hundred and ninety countries using 
multiple data sources for the most recent year available across all sources. The data comes from 
the World Bank’s Doing Business Survey and a variety of other World Bank development 
indicators. The following factors were included in the analysis: the percentage of the population 
that has access to the internet, per capita GDP, rule of law, quality of land administration, and the 
registration of property transparency rankings. Access to the internet was included as digital 
literacy and internet access are prerequisites for a successful implementation of a blockchain 

--- Page 61 ---
 
52 
based land registry. The component was defined by the World Bank as “Internet users are 
individuals who have used the Internet (from any location) in the last 3 months. The Internet can 
be used via a computer, mobile phone, personal digital assistant, games machine, digital TV etc.” 
Per capita GDP provides an indicator as to the public sector budgets that may be available for 
digital transformation. One would expect that countries with low per capita GDP are less likely 
to have sufficient resources to innovate in this way, but there are more pilots in the developing 
world than in the developed. The rule of law index was included for multiple reasons. Countries 
with high degrees of trust are more likely to successfully implement a digital transformation 
project, especially one that deals with ledgers of asset ownership and strong rule of law is a good 
indicator of high trust societies. Furthermore, rule of law as an indicator provides a decent sense 
of stability within a nation. Multi-ethnic societies that struggle with conflict tend to score low on 
rule of law analyses. One does observe that smaller, homogenous nations are overrepresented at 
the top of the index, but the countries represented in the pilots from across the world are not 
necessarily skewed towards small homogenous nations.  
 
The two most direct indicators are quality of land administration and registration of 
property transparency rankings. These indicators get right at the heart of the question of 
conduciveness for blockchain land administration, so they were both given a double weight in 
the formula that determined the final ranking. The quality of land administration index is itself 
“composed of five other indices: the reliability of infrastructure, transparency of information, 
geographic coverage, land dispute resolution, and equal access to property rights. Data are 
collected for each economy’s largest business city (World Bank, N.D.).” The property 
transparency rankings are gauging the time and cost associated with purchasing land and the 

--- Page 62 ---
53 
ability for people in a given jurisdiction to find the information about property ownership that 
would be required for such activities. 
Each indicator was transformed into a score out of one hundred. For internet usage that 
figure was already a percentage out of one hundred. GDP per capita was transformed into a 
percentile thereby slightly diminishing the outliers at the top and bottom of the bell curve and 
diluting GDP per capita slightly in general since it is one of the broader and weaker indicators. 
Ther other indicators were accordingly transformed into a score out of one hundred. The five 
indicators were then summed with the land administration and transparency numbers multiplied 
by two to provide the proper weighting. The corresponding figure was divided by seven, since 
the weighting of the two more important indicators necessitated division by seven rather than 
five. The resulting numbers were then between zero and one hundred with the countries scoring 
closer to one hundred possessing an environment more conducive to a blockchain land registry.  
As can be seen in Table 2, the countries at the top of the list shared certain unique 
characteristics. The most obvious similarity is that these are all wealthy, developed countries. All 
five indicators are to some extent improved by high levels of development. The less obvious 
similarities include countries that are geographically small, relatively homogeneous (possibly 
with the exception of the UK), generally free from intrastate ethnic conflict. Russia at 25th was 
the first large country to appear in the ranking with France, 31st, and Canada, 32nd, the next two 
large countries in the ranking.  
From a theoretical perspective, it is logical that smaller, more homogenous countries have 
higher transparency and land administration scores and generally would be conducive to a digital 
transformation project such as a blockchain land registry.  

--- Page 63 ---
 
54 
Table 2. Top Ten Index 
Rank 
Country Name 
Score 
1 
Singapore 
92.67166216 
2 
Netherlands 
90.6432682 
3 
Hong Kong SAR 
90.44361533 
4 
Luxembourg 
82.85396826 
5 
United Kingdom 
82.85067488 
6 
Ireland 
79.92313709 
7 
Sweden 
79.68477727 
8 
Iceland 
78.44900562 
9 
New Zealand 
75.10366063 
10 
Korea, Rep. 
73.46468777 
  
 
There are some interesting outliers where development did not overcome the land 
administration and transparency figures. The United States ranked 45th and Germany 40th. On the 
other end of the spectrum, there were a few countries that are less developed, with lower per-
capita GDPs that managed to score higher than might be expected. For example, Malaysia landed 
at 25th, the Ivory Coast at 54th, and Peru at 62nd.  
 
The bottom ten countries in the index are not surprising with Niger, Liberia, Guinea 
Bissau, Haiti, Sudan, Somalia, Eritrea, South Sudan, Burundi, and Central African Republic 
ranking at the bottom. The data analysis can be found on this spreadsheet (Merged Data For 
Index - Bratcher Dissertation.xlsx).  
Table 3. Bottom Ten Index 
Rank 
Country Name 
Score 

--- Page 64 ---
 
55 
10 
Niger 
18.390 
9 
Liberia 
14.849 
8 
Guinea-Bissau 
14.638 
7 
Haiti 
14.658 
6 
Sudan 
14.106 
5 
Somalia 
10.9 
4 
Eritrea 
8.715 
3 
South Sudan 
6.023 
2 
Burundi 
5.492 
1 
Central African Republic 
4.863 
* rank 1 is the lowest ranking country 
 
Building on the index, a factor analysis of the variables was conducted in order to 
understand which variables most impacted a country’s predisposition for adopting a blockchain 
land registry. This factor analysis was necessary due to the potential correlation between the 
variables in the index. It also provided some additional insights that was not readily apparent in 
the strict index. This analysis (see Table 4) demonstrated that the percentage of internet 
penetration was the most impactful variable while the transparency of land administration 
variable was the least impactful. It is logical that internet penetration is the most impactful 
variable because a digitally connected society is more likely to have the tools and education to 
utilize digitally based services like a blockchain based land administration system. The 
transparency in land administration variable was the least impactful. On one hand, this could be 
expected since transparency of a country’s current land administration system is not necessarily 
indicative of how successful a blockchain application would be in that context. On the other 
hand, one might expect the transparency of land administration component to have an outsized 

--- Page 65 ---
56 
impact given how correlated it is with the topic at hand. It does provide a glimpse into the need 
for a system that provides greater transparency for those countries that currently lack it but the 
variable’s ability to predict the ease with which a registry would be adopted is surprisingly not 
particularly strong. Another potential reason for the weakness of the impact of the transparency 
of land administration component is the qualitative nature of the data. Internet penetration 
percentages and GDP per capita figures lend themselves to more precise measurements.  
                                                   Table 4. Principal Components 
Principal Components (eigenvectors) 
Variable 
Compl 
Unexplained 
Internet Penetration 
0.504 
0.18 
Rule of Law Score 
0.481 
0.254 
GDP Per Capita Percentile 
0.393 
0.502 
Quality of Land Admin Index 
0.482 
0.25 
Transparency of Info Index 
0.357 
0.589 
The eigenvector Component 1 score explains 65% of the correlation with the Ease of 
Blockchain Factor Analysis. The Ease of Blockchain variable describes a country’s 
predisposition or structural disadvantages or advantages when it comes to the adoption of a 
blockchain based land administration system. The phrase Ease of Blockchain will be used to 
describe this variable moving forward.  
Table 5. Correlation Analysis 
Correlation Analysis 
Principal 
components/correlation 
Number of observations 
190 
Number of components 
1 
Rotation: (unrotated = principal) 
Trace 
5 

--- Page 66 ---
57 
Rho 
0.645 
Component 
Eigenvalue 
Difference 
Proportion 
Cumulative 
Component 1 
3.225 
2.237 
0.645 
0.645 
Component 2 
0.988 
0.62 
0.298 
0.843 
Component 3 
0.368 
0.124 
0.074 
0.916 
Component 4 
0.245 
0.07 
0.049 
0.965 
Component 5 
0.174 
. 
0.035 
1 
After establishing the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis variable regression scoring 
was used to generate scores in which -3.829572 was the lowest score and 3.522742 was the 
highest score with the mean being zero (see Table 6).  
Table 6. Variable Regression Scoring 
Scores for Component 1 
Percentiles 
Smallest 
1% 
-3.821 
-3.83 
5% 
-2.753 
-3.821 
Observations 
190 
10% 
-2.396 
-3.784 
Sum of Weight 
190 
25% 
-1.45 
-3.538
Mean 
-4.85E-10 
50% 
0.051 
Std. Deviation 
1.796 
Largest 
75% 
1.365 
3.298 
Variance 
3.225 
90% 
2.450 
3.445 
Skewness 
-0.063 
95% 
2.753 
3.492 
Kurtosis 
2.078 
99% 
3.492 
3.523 
The following tables demonstrate the ranking of the top ten and bottom ten nations based 
on their Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis Score.  
Table 7. The Bottom 10 Countries in the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis 
Country Name 
Score 
Central African Republic 
-3.83

--- Page 67 ---
 
58 
Burundi 
-3.821 
South Sudan 
-3.783 
Eritrea 
-3.538 
Somalia 
-3.321 
Guinea-Bissau 
-3.027 
Liberia 
-2.986 
Sudan 
-2.909 
Mozambique 
-2.824 
Chad 
-2.753 
  
 
Table 8. The Top 10 Countries in the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis 
Country Name 
            Score 
Ireland 
2.753 
Denmark 
2.753 
Korea, Rep. 
2.756 
Sweden 
2.795 
Luxembourg 
2.995 
Iceland 
3.04 
United Kingdom 
3.3 
Hong Kong SAR, China 
3.445 
Netherlands 
3.492 
Singapore 
3.523 
 
 
It is interesting to note the divergences, albeit modest, between the Factor Analysis 
rankings and the index rankings. Haiti shows up on the index as the 7th worst location whereas it 

--- Page 68 ---
59 
did not make the top ten worst scoring on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis. Conversely, 
Mozambique appears on the bottom ten for the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis but is 
replaced by Niger on the index. The internet penetration rate for Niger is slightly higher than in 
Mozambique so that could explain the change given that the internet penetration rate explains a 
majority of the correlation for the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis. Haiti has an internet 
penetration rate double that of Mozambique which may explain why it would be one of the worst 
on the Index but not make the bottom 10 on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis.  
For the countries at the top of both the index and Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis, it 
is interesting to note that the island nations and micro-states score slightly higher on index. 
Geography and the increased likelihood of homogeneity amongst the populations of micro-state 
like Singapore and Luxembourg seem to play a role here. High GDP per capita is also a shared 
trait amongst the top countries in both the index and factor analysis with the United Kingdom 
and South Korea being the only examples of countries that are not in the top 25 countries for 
GDP per capita but still made the top 10 in the index.  
In summary, the index and factor analysis brings several interesting learnings about the 
factors influencing the ease of blockchain based land administration to the surface. Examples 
include the importance of internet penetration, the interesting role of country size and 
homogeneity, and finally, the likelihood of countries using the Torrens system to appear higher 
on the index and factor analysis. The Torrens system was developed by Sir Robert Torrens, the 
Registrar General in Australia when it was a colony of the England. The Torrens system differs 
from the Deeds system in that, in the former, the registry of land ownership is updated with each 
transactions while in the latter, all instruments and documents related to the land are compiled 

--- Page 69 ---
 
60 
and must be reviewed to determine legal facts about the land in question. The Torrens systems is 
now used in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Israel, Singapore, and the United 
States.   
 
Chapter 3 provides both a unique index and data driven examination of a country's 
suitability for blockchain land administration and a thorough rebuttal of the prior academic 
research that contended that blockchains were technically insufficient instruments for use in land 
administration. It is likely that nations that are most suitable for an implementation of blockchain 
for land administration are the least likely to be in need of that kind of transparency, but it is also 
true that nations on the top of the list stand to gain commercially from the prospect of such a 
program. Conversely, nations on the bottom of the index are not fertile soil for blockchain in 
land administration, but they stand to benefit tremendously from the transparency that such a 
system might provide. Chapter 4 examines the political challenges for implementation of 
blockchain for land administration which is where the crux of the challenge lies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 70 ---
61 
CHAPTER 4  
OVERCOMING THE POLITICAL OBSTACLES TO A BLOCKCHAIN REGISTRY 
There have been many blockchain land registry pilot programs across the developing and 
developed world. The initial pages of Chapter 4 are dedicated to a brief overview of the majority 
of those pilot programs. This overview is followed by a discussion of the theoretical explanations 
for the differences between developed and developing world pilot programs. The tables below 
provide a quick reference guide for the various pilot programs in the developing and developed 
world. The first column contains the country name (and state if more than one pilot took place in 
that country). The second column is the name of the technology provider that was enlisted for the 
pilot. The third column provides a brief description of the results of the pilot and obstacles 
encountered. The fourth and final column shows the results of the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis Score. It is interesting to note that none of the pilots cited technical concerns as it 
relates to the failure of any of these efforts.  
The technology partners range from established Fortune 500 companies to small startups. 
The primary reason that many of these companies are small startups is that most developing 
nations are not in a position to pay large consulting firm prices for a pilot program of this nature. 
It is common practice for a startup to provide near free services for a pilot program in order to 
receive press coverage and be in the running for larger implementations in the future. Factom, 
Bitfury, Chromaway, Medici, and Propy are all similar in that they are blockchain startups that 
received venture capital funding in the mid-2010s to work on enterprise blockchain applications. 
Chromaway has their roots in Sweden while Propy, Medici, and Factor are U.S. based. IBM is 

--- Page 71 ---
 
62 
certainly an outlier here but they did have a substantial blockchain practice for many years. 
BenBen, Peersyst, and Seso are local startups with little public information known about them.  
Table 9. Developing Country Blockchain Land Registry Pilots 
Country 
Company 
Contracted for Pilot 
Major Obstacles 
Ease of Blockchain 
Factor Analysis 
Percentile 
Honduras 
Factom 
Political and business 
resistance 
-1.26; 29th percentile 
Georgia 
Bitfury 
Political resistance, conflict 
with Russia 
1.19; 79th percentile 
India 
Chromaway 
Delayed by the pandemic 
-0.76; 40th percentile 
Zambia 
Medici Land 
Governance 
Project “in progress” Few 
details available  
-2.39; 10th percentile 
Brazil 
Ubiquity 
Political resistance and cost 
concerns 
1.05; 70th percentile 
Ghana 
IBM and BenBen  
Moderately successful pilot 
-0.74; 41st percentile 
Rwanda 
Medici Land 
Governance 
Moderately successful pilot 
0.02; 51st percentile 
Bolivia 
Chromaway 
Moderately successful pilot 
-1.27; 28th percentile 
 
Peru 
Chromaway 
Moderately successful pilot 
0.29; 60th percentile 
Paraguay 
Chromaway 
Moderately successful pilot 
-0.76; 42nd percentile 
Liberia 
Medici Land 
Governance 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
-2.99; 4th percentile 
Colombia 
Peersyst (Spanish) 
Still underway as of 2022 
0.46; 65th percentile 
South Africa 
Seso Global 
(Nigerian Company) 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
0.20; 59th percentile 
Nigeria 
Seso Global 
(Nigerian Company) 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
-1.85; 22nd percentile 
Kenya 
No technology 
partners named 
Unknown results 
-1.13; 31st percentile 
 
Table 10. Developed Countries Blockchain Land Registry Pilots 
Country 
Company 
Contracted for Pilot 
Major Obstacles 
Ease of Blockchain 
Factor Analysis 
Percentile 

--- Page 72 ---
63 
Sweden 
Chromaway 
Moderately successful 
pilot 
2.79; 96th percentile 
United States, 
WY 
Medici Land 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
2.04; 85th percentile 
United States, 
VT 
Propy 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
2.04; 85th percentile 
United States, 
IL 
No technology 
partner named 
Moderately successful 
pilot 
2.04; 85th percentile 
Ukraine 
Propy 
Derailed by conflict 
-0.36; 38th percentile
Russia 
No technology 
partners named 
Derailed by conflict 
1.31; 74th percentile 
Netherlands 
No technology 
partners named 
Unknown results 
3.491997 99th percentile 
Japan 
Propy 
Unknown results 
2.54; 91st percentile 
Bermuda 
Landfolio 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
Not available 
Australia 
ChromaWay 
Moderately successful 
pilot 
2.31; 88th percentile 
Canada 
ChromaWay 
Political and funding 
obstacles 
2.35; 89th percentile 
The Case of Honduras 
One of the earliest blockchain land registry pilot programs kicked off in Honduras in 
2015. Honduras scored a -1.26 and was in the 29th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis. This score positions Honduras, with its low internet penetration rate and rule of law 
scores as a country that is not predisposed to have a successful implantation of a blockchain land 
registry pilot. Factom, a Texas based blockchain company, announced that the blockchain land 
registry pilot would “allow for more secure mortgages, contracts, and mineral rights” and 
decrease opportunities for corruption (Chavez-Dreyfuss, 2015). The project stalled as soon as it 
began with the Honduran government essentially refusing to comment to the press. Paul Snow, 

--- Page 73 ---
 
64 
the Founder of Factom told reporters that the project stalled for “political reasons” (CoinDesk, 
2015). Your author called Factom in 2018 to ask for more details about the difficulties of the 
pilot program and he was told that certain elements within the Honduran government, when 
made aware of the project, asked that it be discontinued. One could be forgiven for thinking that 
various “veto players” (Tsebelis, 2002) in the real-estate industry put pressure on their 
counterparts in the Honduran government when they realized that such a system with radical 
transparency and accountability would limit their profit margins.  
The Case of Georgia 
The next major pilot took place in the Republic of Georgia also in 2016. Georgia scored a 
1.19 and was in the 79th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis. Georgia is a 
small, somewhat homogenous country with high internet penetration which all bode well at first 
glance. Russian military aggression ranges from a menacing to existential threat which is an 
external factor simultaneously working for and against a successful pilot. Many former Soviet 
states have turned to blockchain to secure voting and other government functions with the Baltic 
States being the best example of that. On the other hand, Russia’s destabilizing effect can create 
urgent priorities potentially stifling research and development on a variety of non-essential fronts 
including land administration. Land administration in Georgia previously straddled two 
departments both with opaque systems which led to rampant corruption (Shang, n.d.). In 2004 
the government replaced these two entities with the National Agency of Public Registry which 
quickly turned the registry system into a world class operation. By the time of the pilot, the 
World Bank recognized Georgia as 3rd out of 189 countries in ease of property registration 
(World Bank, 2016). In mid-2016, Bitfury, an Amsterdam based bitcoin mining company, signed 

--- Page 74 ---
 
65 
an agreement for a one-year pilot with the Georgian government to provide the technology stack 
and implementation of a blockchain land registry. Bitfury then set out to create a blockchain 
based “time stamping laying on top of the NAPRs existing land registry system” (Shang, n.d.). 
During a webinar that your author attended, former Georgian land registry officials commented 
that, in addition to efficiency and transparency benefits, the Georgian land registry system would 
be more secure against cyber-attacks. It is not a stretch to surmise that this official was referring 
to Russian destabilization tactics of which land registry and other public registry systems are 
often targets. Academics at the New America think tank surmised that the project was a success 
due to an educated land administration bureaucracy and the quality data obtained years 
beforehand as a result of institutional and political reforms (Shang, n.d.). The political pressure 
for transparency and clean government heaped on President Saakashvili likely contributed along 
with the geopolitical tensions with their neighbor to the north.  
The Case of India 
 
India is an interesting jurisdiction for blockchain land registry pilots and policy 
experimentation based on the history of land reform in the various Indian states. India scored a 
lower than expected -0.76 and was in the 40th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis. India is like China in that it is a large multi-ethnic nation with swaths of impoverished 
regions and cities mixed in with pockets of wealth and development making it a challenging 
jurisdiction for a successful pilot. However, the pilot took place in the state of Andhra Pradesh 
which is more homogenous and has a higher GDP per capita than the average Indian state. As 
alluded to in the literature review, India offers a natural experiment in which certain states have 
traditionally administered land by allowing private property rights and some have more 

--- Page 75 ---
66 
communal or traditional land administration legacies. What is more, approximately 40% of all 
litigation in India civil courts relates to “illegal encroachments and title disputes” (Thakur, 
2020). Whereas Georgia ranked 3rd out of 189 countries in the World Bank study of ease of 
property registration, India ranked 154th (World Bank, 2016). This is likely due to the 
heterogeneity of Indian systems across various states and jurisdictions. While several Indian 
states are piloting blockchain based land registry systems, Andhra Pradesh’s partnership with 
Chromaway is the most notable. In late 2017, the government of Andhra Pradesh inked a deal 
with the Swedish blockchain real estate company, Chromaway. The government of Andhra 
Pradesh estimated that 70% of civil court cases relate to land disputes, much higher than the 
country average. Deputy Chief Minister Pilli Chandra Bose stated that “At present, everyone, 
right from the data entry operator, is changing land records, which ultimately lead to land 
disputes. But once getting purification of land records and implementing the blockchain 
technology, it will be impossible to tamper” (The New Indian Express, 2019). The Deputy Chief 
Minister also commented that anytime a land record is changed, the landowner will receive a text 
message notifying them of the change and asking if the change is warranted. There are several 
open source articles that reference the use of a private blockchain in the Andhra Pradesh pilot, 
but details about the technology stack are scarce. The purification of land records was to be 
complete by May of 2020 but it remains unknown if this process was delayed by the Covid-19 
pandemic.  
The Case of Zambia 
Zambia has incredibly low levels of participation in the country’s formal land registry. In 
fact, over 80% of real estate in Zambia is not registered with the Ministry of Land and Natural 

--- Page 76 ---
 
67 
Resources (Tembo, 2016). Technically, all land in Zambia belongs to the state and the authority 
over it is delegated to the more than 200 traditional chiefs in a customary land tenure 
arrangement (Huth, 2017).  Zambia scored a -2.39 and was in the 10th percentile on the Ease of 
Blockchain Factor Analysis. Zambia is not a homogeneous nation, there are more than fifty 
tribes in the country, but it is relatively conflict free and stable especially compared to its 
neighbors. Developing a comprehensive blockchain based land title system in Zambia was 
always going to be a tall order.  
In 2014, the government kicked off a National Land Titling Program with a focus on 
private property rights. In the fall of 2018, Medici Land Governance, signed a memorandum of 
understanding with the Lusaka City Council to deliver “250,000 certificates of title related to real 
property” (Overstock.com, 2019).  
 
The Zambian case highlights an important issue with blockchain land registry pilots in 
the developing world. Privatizing communally held land is a treacherous endeavor. Some of the 
pilot programs, in India and Zambia specifically, encountered problems with corruption on the 
data entry side (Currier, 2020). In the process of cleaning up land records, elites and 
unscrupulous actors paid bribes to data entry clerks to change the title in their favor. While the 
technology provides an immutable ledger, garbage data on the front-end risks entrenching 
corruption further. Thankfully, the Zambian pilot focused on urban residential property where 
private property rights are already well understood and expected. The Oakland Institute classifies 
the Zambian pilot as a “large scale project in-progress,” but details are hard to come by. The 
author’s contacts at Medici Land Governance could not be reached for comment on the progress 
of the pilot.  

--- Page 77 ---
 
68 
The Case of Brazil 
Brazil scored a 1.05 and was in the 70th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis. Brazil’s modest internet penetration rate of 73% is pulled down by rural communities 
in the hinterland which were not the focus of the pilot.  
Brazil is another instructive example of a moderately successful pilot program that failed 
to profess to full scale implementation. In 2017, Ubiquity, a US based blockchain firm, entered 
into a services agreement with the Real Estate Registry Office of Brazil. Ubiquity uses a SaaS 
model and they hoped to license their blockchain based land registry software to other cities and 
municipalities throughout Brazil. A reporter at ABC Money claimed that the full-scale 
implementation was “halted because of opposition from the officials who would be displaced, 
and the costs associated with implementation” (Preece, 2018). While the source that inspired that 
quote was not listed, the sentiment aligns with most other pilots that failed to be extended to full 
scale implementation. It is interesting to note that a reporter was made aware, through a source 
that he deemed to be legitimate, that the displacement of legacy land administration officials was 
one of the main reasons that the pilot failed to progress. This is yet another example that the 
politics of various veto players, and silent veto players, are an underappreciated obstacle.  
The Case of Ghana 
As in much of Sub-Saharan Africa, 80% of Ghana’s land is not formerly recorded 
(Mwanza & Wilkins, 2018). Ghana scored a -0.74 and was in the 41st percentile on the Ease of 
Blockchain Factor Analysis. Ghana is relatively more prosperous than many of its neighbors in 
the region but struggles with a minor north-south ethnic conflict. Despite this, it is well placed 

--- Page 78 ---
 
69 
amongst its peers to see a successful implementation of a blockchain based land registry 
nationwide.  
In 2018, the Ghanaian Ministry of Land and Natural Resources signed a memorandum of 
understanding with IBM to conduct a land registry pilot. Over the past fifteen years, Ghana has 
been working to improve private property rights in three stages; institutional land tenure reforms, 
strengthening of “urban and rural land administration and management systems for efficient and 
transparent land service delivery” (Ghana Web, 2018), and the blockchain land registry 
partnership with IBM. This data cleanup and institutional reform process was essential to laying 
a foundation for future innovation. A Ghanaian company called BenBen is also associated with 
the pilot. BenBen extended the partnership to the Ghana Real Estate Developers Association to 
develop a pilot for end-to-end housing transactions (BenBen, n.d.). With only 45% internet 
penetration and lower land administration and transparency scores, Ghana came in at 124th on the 
Index in Chapter 3. This pilot appears to be one of the more successful in Africa likely because it 
is part of a broader property rights improvement push by the government and the fact that the 
pilot is spearheaded by a Ghanaian company.  
The Case of Rwanda 
Rwanda, despite its tragic recent history, is starting to be known as Africa’s Silicon 
Valley (Forbes Africa, 2023). It scored a 0.02 and was in the 51st percentile on the Ease of 
Blockchain Factor Analysis.  
The Rwanda Land Management and Use Authority signed a memorandum of 
understanding with Medici Land Governance (Medici is also working in Zambia) in late 2018. 
The CEO of Medici Land Governance, Dr. Ali El Husseini, had this to say about the partnership, 

--- Page 79 ---
 
70 
“We appreciate the clear objectives and strategic road map the Rwandan government has 
outlined toward economic empowerment. By using our expertise in blockchain, mobile apps, and 
other technologies, we can help Rwanda fulfill the goals of its major land reform efforts in 
standardizing land ownership on a digital, secure, user-friendly system that provides equal access 
for all people in a timely, responsive manner.” The Rwandan government plans to develop 
applications that create a purely paperless land governance system. This pilot is promising 
because Medici Land Governance specializes in blockchain land registries, and Rwanda has a 
unique blend of stable politics and effective institutions. Rwanda ranks 37th globally, and only 
behind Namibia in Sub-Saharan Africa, on the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index. Rwanda 
also scores just under South Africa and above Botswana on a respect for property rights index. 
Still another factor that bodes well for blockchain in Rwanda Kigali’s growing vibrancy in 
technology focuses businesses.  
The Cases of Bolivia, Peru and Paraguay 
 
Bolivia, Peru and Paraguay are combined here for reasons explained further below but, 
other than geographic proximity, they have somewhat divergent scores on the index. Bolivia 
scored a -1.27 and was in the 28th percentile, Peru scored a 0.29 and was in the 60th percentile 
and Paraguay scored a -0.76 and was in the 42nd percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis. 
Chromaway, a Swedish blockchain company, and the Inter-American Development Bank 
partnered with the land registry offices of Bolivia, Peru and Paraguay to pilot land reforms that 
included a blockchain based land registry. This project is part of a larger initiative called 
LACChain, a consortium of public and private institutions and businesses in Latin America 

--- Page 80 ---
 
71 
seeking to harness blockchain for social good (LACChain Alliance, 2020). This cluster of pilots 
is interesting because they are funded by the Inter-American Development Bank and they are 
utilizing a public blockchain platform called Chromia. Chromia was developed by Chromaway 
but has split off into a separate company. It combines relational database technology with 
blockchain technology with an easy-to-use programming language called RELL. In contrast to 
many of the other pilots, “ChomaWay is trying to develop a solution for three different countries, 
with a focus on sustainable governance and incorporating W3c standards such as Verifiable 
Claims and Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs)” (Ledger Insights, 2019). This pilot is especially 
promising as it has the backing of the Inter-American Development Bank and several 
municipalities in the aforementioned countries.  
In 2018, the Bolivian National Agency for Land signed a services agreement with UST 
Global, a blockchain company based in Spain (Coin Rivet, 2018). This pilot involves uploading 
hashes of land registry documents to the Ethereum blockchain using the Interplanetary File 
System (IPFS). As Ethereum is a public blockchain, the hash of the data is the only thing that 
will be stored on it. The user interface of the land registry will allow those with the appropriate 
permissions to access sensitive information.  
The Case of Columbia 
The Colombia government is bankrolling the pilot and President Ivan Duque has 
explicitly stated that blockchain technology is part of his policy plan for increasing efficiency in 
government (Coin Rivet, 2018). At 77th out of 128 the Colombian Rule of Law Index score is 
slightly below average, but the political support behind this pilot makes it promising. Colombia 
scored a 0.46 and was in the 65th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis. The land 

--- Page 81 ---
 
72 
registry system was developed in collaboration with the Spanish blockchain company Peersyst 
and is aimed at helping the more than “100,000 Colombians who do not have proper 
documentation of the land they currently inhabit” (CNBCTV 2022). The outcome of this pilot is 
yet unknown but the change of administration to President Gustavo Petro in 2022 may have 
derailed it.  
The Case of Liberia 
 
With its litany of challenges it is unsurprising that Liberia scored a -2.99 and was in the 
4th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis. The structural facts on the ground make 
any successful blockchain implementation in Liberia extremely unlikely.  
Medici Land Governance is conducting a pro bono pilot in Liberia (Medici, 2019). While 
not much is known about this pilot, Medici lists one of its goals as knowledge transfer to the 
Liberian land administration workforce. Liberia ranks 98th out of 128 countries indexed by the 
World Justice Project. Given that this pilot is pro bono and Liberia’s HDI score of 0.4 indicates 
more pressing and present challenges, this pilot is unlikely to develop into full scale 
implementation.  
The Case of South Africa and Nigeria 
 
Seso Global, a Nigerian blockchain real estate company, is piloting their platform in 
Makhaza South Africa and in parts of Nigeria. The South African pilot is unique in that the one 
thousand properties in the pilot are new government subsidized residential properties that have 
not yet been entered into the registry (Seso Global, n.d.). For this reason, there is likely to be 
little to no disagreement about the data to be entered and about the ownership of the properties. 
To further secure the data capture process, Seso Global spent two months going door to door and 

--- Page 82 ---
 
73 
collecting data from the residents of the neighborhood. The mobile enabled Seso Global platform 
integrates with third parties so that mortgages and conveyances can be conducted digitally. South 
Africa’s ranking of 45th on the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index and the unique nature of 
the pilot makes this one promising. An additional factor to watch is that Seso Global is an 
African based company run by African entrepreneurs conducting a pilot in Africa. This dynamic 
may increase the likelihood of the pilot moving to a full-scale implementation since Seso Global 
has the advantage of greater regional cultural intelligence and lower operating costs. South 
Africa scored a 0.20 and was in the 59th percentile on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis. 
The Case of Kenya 
There is little known about the blockchain land registry pilot in Kenya. It was announced in 2020 
but no technology partners have been named and it is still in the planning phase according to The 
Oakland Institute (Currier, 2020). Kenya scored a -1.13 on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis. Kenya is well known for the rapid adoption of mobile banking and other technologies 
so it likely would hit above its weight when it comes to blockchain adoption.  
 
Summary of Developing Nation Pilot Programs 
In the developing world, “the technological product cannot resolve a pre-existing 
institutional malaise, including lack of transparency, corruption and lacking accountability” 
(Eder, 2019). Several political and institutional factors are at play that require further study once 
more data is available. First, the level of government that authorized the pilot gives an indication 
of the level of internal support. How strong is the commitment to a transparent registry when 
incumbent firms, certain members of the bureaucracy, and connected politicians lobby for the 

--- Page 83 ---
 
74 
project to be killed? Institutions and norms are another important factor to consider in any 
endeavor relating to property rights (Acemoglu & Robinson 2006; North 1973 & 1991; and 
DeSoto, 2000). The following questions should be considered when searching for a jurisdiction 
in which to conduct a blockchain land registry pilot: What is the state of the current registry? Is it 
digitized? Are property boundaries effectively demarcated? Is the land currently governed under 
traditional law in a communal fashion? Is the land occupied by a homogenous ethnic group? 
What is the perception of the courts and their ability to handle land disputes? What kind of 
services agreement has been reached between the technology partner and the government body 
leading the pilot? Is this a pro bono effort? Is the application to be built on a public or private 
blockchain (there are political implications here)? What is the form of government in the country 
in question? How organized and powerful are interest groups that benefit from the current 
system? 
The questions to consider in a developing world pilot are going to be different, or at least 
the level of emphasis placed on each question will change, than those in the developed world 
context. Questions around interest groups and political process will increase in importance while 
questions about customary land practices and rule of law will decrease in importance. The 
following section summarizes the pilot programs in the developed world. Saint Kitts and Nevis, 
Mexico, and the Ukraine are technically still developing countries by human development index 
standards, but because of a semi-respectable history of private property and their proximity to the 
U.S. or the E.U., they have been included in the developed world section. In other words, these 
countries are more similar to developed nations like Japan, Australia and the United States than 

--- Page 84 ---
 
75 
to developing nations like Liberia, Rwanda and Paraguay. The pilots are presented in 
chronological order from when a public announcement was issued.  
 
Pilot Programs in the Developed World 
Blockchain based land administration provides varying benefits in each context but there 
are some broad observations to be made with regard to the efficiencies seen in the developing 
and developed worlds. In the developing world, blockchain land administration is more likely to 
be addressing issues of corruption and rule of law while in the developing world, the common 
refrain is one of driving business efficiency. The transaction costs of purchasing property vary 
greatly from country to country but most developed countries have transaction costs between 5% 
to 15% of the value of the property. Outlier examples include Iceland at around 3% and Belgium 
at nearly 16% (Global Property Guide, n.d.). With global real estate transaction volume coming 
in around $3.8 trillion annually in 2022, even a 10% reduction in transaction costs on real estate 
transaction at the low end of the transaction cost range, say 5% of each property sold that year, 
indicates a potential market of $19 billion (Markets and Research, 2023). The wholesale 
elimination of transaction costs in real estate transaction could be worth $190 billion annually. 
Wholesale elimination of transaction costs is unrealistic in the short and medium term, but there 
are signs that things are moving that direction. In March of 2024, the National Association of 
Realtors announced a court settlement that essentially ended the practice of 3% commission for 
both the buy and seller’s realtor. Those commissions will now be negotiable and set by market 
forces (Bahney, 2024). 
The Case of Sweden 

--- Page 85 ---
76 
Sweden was the first developed nation to conduct a blockchain land registry pilot and 
was the first country to digitize land records in the 1970s. The Swedish Lantmäteriet, the land 
registry authority, actively pursued several technology and banking partners including: 
Chromaway, SBAB Bank, Landshypotek, consultancy Kairos Future, “real estate search portal 
Svensk Fastighetsförmedling, telecom Telai Sverige and IT firm Evry” (Kim, 2018). Sweden is 
well positioned for blockchain innovation in the land administration space with a 2.79 score on 
the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis putting it in the 96th percentile of all countries measured. 
Sweden is also famous for its homogeneity and efficiency. The pilot was conducted on a private 
blockchain network, a reasonable choice for a country with trusted institutions like Sweden. In 
2017, the Lantmäteriet began conducting blockchain anchored real estate transactions. In 
conversations with the Lantmäteriet’s Chief Innovation Officer Mats Snall, the author gained the 
impression that the Swedish pilot was a mixed success. The expected benefits materialized in a 
slightly diminished form than expected and the obstacles to full-scale implementation did not 
justify the investment. Further complicating matters, “Swedish law does not allow for the use of 
electronic signatures for property transactions” (Bennett, 2021, p. 14). Thus far, the political will 
to allow electronic signatures for property transactions has not materialized. One could speculate 
that there are entrenched interests whose business model depends on a more manual property 
transaction process.  
The Case of The United States 
There are four notable blockchain pilots in the United States that are either ongoing or 
that have been completed. Medici Land Governance has two pilots in Wyoming. The first in 
2018 in Teton County and the second in 2020 in Carbon County. Propy, a California based 

--- Page 86 ---
77 
blockchain real estate firm, has a pilot in South Burlington, Vermont and Cook County 
(Chicago), Illinois conducted a blockchain land registry pilot internally with the county clerk and 
the land registry office. The United States is moderately well positioned for blockchain 
innovation in the land administration space with a 2.04 score on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis putting it in the 85th percentile of all countries measured. In my own experience 
working on this issue in the United States, particularly in States like Texas, there are powerful 
incumbents that are not incentivized to innovate. I recall a meeting on the topic of a blockchain 
land registry pilot in which the county clerk included several title companies in the meeting. It 
was implicitly clear that any pilot program would need the approval of several incumbent players 
such as title companies. Needless to say, this pilot program was not approved.  
The Teton County pilot was the first of its kind in the United States. Medici built the land 
registry application on the Open Index Protocol using the Flo Blockchain. The Flo blockchain 
uses the Bitcoin source code and is a public chain. The Teton County Clerk indicated that the 
information that is currently available to the public is the same amount of information that will 
be available on the new blockchain enabled registry (Baydakova, 2018). In other words, there 
will not be sensitive information or PII, at no more than is visible on the current system, floating 
around on the blockchain for all to see. The pilot programs in Wyoming have overwhelming 
political support in the Wyoming State House but it is unknown what kind of opposition exists at 
the local level or among title companies. Not only does the County Clerk support it, but the 
Governor of Wyoming and a Wyoming Senator actively advocated for this collaboration. The 
Wyoming State Legislature has passed thirteen bills clarifying regulatory guidance around 
blockchain and cryptocurrency and paving the way for cryptocurrency banks. Kaken, a 

--- Page 87 ---
 
78 
cryptocurrency exchange, and Avanti Bank both received banking charters from Wyoming in 
2020 (Boot, 2020). Furthermore, in November of 2020, Wyoming elected the first U.S. Senator 
who openly owns cryptocurrency. Senator Cynthia Loomis is a proponent of the technology and 
the first woman to be elected to the U.S. Senate from Wyoming.  
The Teton County pilot is complete, and a full-scale implementation is in progress. 
Carbon County Wyoming signed a memorandum of understanding with Medici in April of 2020. 
The commissioning of a second pilot in a neighboring county bodes well for the future of 
blockchain land registries in Wyoming.  
Propy’s South Burlington, Vermont pilot begin in early 2019 with the support of 
Vermont’s Governor Phil Scott and his staff (Propy, 2019). Although not to the level of 
Wyoming, Vermont’s Legislature is supportive of blockchain technology and passed legislation 
in the 2018 session that mandated the study of blockchain technology for use in land 
administration.  
Cook County, Illinois conducted their pilot in 2016 and 2017 and released a report of 
their findings later that year. Given that this report is the most in-depth, publicly available 
assessment of a pilot program, it is prudent to provide a summary of the report.  
The report correctly identifies that “blockchain technology is a known method for permanently 
storing transactional records that in a number of respects is superior to locally-isolated client-
server models, and can provide a method of recordkeeping that is resistant to alteration, even by 
government officials” (CCRD, 2017). The researchers and civil servants in Illinois concluded 
that a proof of work style public blockchain is not idea for land administration in the developed 
world context. They found that distributed ledgers or private blockchains would be better suited. 

--- Page 88 ---
79 
With the benefit of hindsight, we can observe that the tokenization of real world assets is likely 
to skip the county land office and be injected directly into the capital stack through the 
tokenization of equity in real estate, bonds, and treasury bills. In fact, BlackRock CEO Larry 
Fink stated that “tokenization is the next generation for markets” (Heaver, 2024). It is not clear if 
real estate tokenization will land on public blockchains like Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Chainlink or 
if it will be done on private blockchains. There is more tokenization activity on public chains but 
private blockchains remain dominant in the world of blockchain based land administration. 
Another interesting observation from the Cook County report is that “blockchain can provide a 
mechanism to combine the act of conveyance and the act of providing notice (recordation) of the 
conveyance into one event” (CCRD, 2017). The concept of digital property abstracts have the 
potential to aggregate real estate data that is traditionally siloed in multiple government agencies, 
“empowering residential and commercial property buyers, as well as lenders and other interested 
parties while creating a framework for a digital property token” (CCRD, 2017). 
Pilot Results: 
Result:  The participants designed a blockchain real estate conveyance software 
workflow that can be a framework for the first legal blockchain conveyance in Illinois 
(and possibly the US.) (CCRD, 2017). 
Result:  CCRD has successfully used components of blockchain technology (file hashing 
and Merkle trees) to secure government records on a site maintained by an authorized 
non-government reseller (CCRD, 2017). 
Result:  CCRD used the concept of “oracles” to build the most informative property 
information website in Cook County, with a dedicated landing page for each parcel. 

--- Page 89 ---
80 
These landing pages can be conceptualized as “digital property abstracts,” which help 
people see the benefits of consolidating important property information (CCRD, 2017). 
Result: CCRD’s current enterprise land records software vendor, Conduent (formerly 
Xerox/ACS) has agreed to incorporate some of the technology used in blockchains, 
particularly file hashing and data integrity certification, into the new land records system 
currently being installed at CCRD. Both parties will work together over the next year to 
explore further possible uses (CCRD, 2017). 
The Case of Ukraine 
Propy builds its real estate smart contracts on Ethereum, a well-known public blockchain. 
They signed an agreement with the Ukrainian Government in 2017 to pilot their blockchain land 
titling solution (Ngo, 2017). The CEO of Propy, Natalie Karayaneva, is a Bulgarian entrepreneur 
with a track record of success in previous ventures. It is possible that her network in Eastern 
Europe provided her with the connections needed to cement the deal with the Ukrainian 
Government. Just as Estonia, Georgia, and other former Soviet states have turned to blockchain 
to increase security in anticipation of Russian hacking, Ukraine may have made similar 
calculations.  Ukraine is poorly positioned amongst developed countries for blockchain 
innovation in the land administration space with a -0.36 score on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 
Analysis putting it in the 38th percentile of all countries measured. The Russian invasion likely 
overshadowed any progress made on this pilot.  
The Case of Russia 
Not much is known about the Russian land registry pilot other than the announcement 
from the Ministry of Economic Development which stated that Russia will “run a pilot project in 

--- Page 90 ---
81 
Moscow in the first half of next year, to see how reliable blockchains really are for land registry 
purposes” (Meyer, 2017). The Economic Development Minister, Maxim Oreshkin, is quoted as 
saying, “The future of the public administration lies in this [blockchain] area.” Russia is 
moderately well positioned for blockchain innovation in the land administration space with a 
1.13 score on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis putting it in the 74th percentile of all 
countries measured. Their military expansionism likely curtailed any efforts to innovate in land 
administration.  
The Case of the Netherlands 
Even less is known about the pilot in the Netherlands, but the Netherlands did commit to 
“integrating the blockchain solution into the country’s land registry ecosystem in one to three 
years (Takyar, 2019). The Netherlands was also one of the twenty-two EU countries who signed 
on to a declaration to establish a European blockchain association. The Netherlands is the ideal 
jurisdiction for a blockchain land administration pilot with a score of 3.49 on the Ease of 
Blockchain Factor Analysis which puts them in the 99th percentile of all countries measured. 
They are second only to Singapore on the index.  
The Case of Japan 
Propy, the California based venture-funded startup mentioned previously, is part of the 
pilot in Japan. The Propy platform successfully hosted two real estate transactions in 
2019 in which Hong King property investors purchased two residential plots in Niseko, Japan. 
This is significant because market participants are driving adoption in Japan. Japan has taken a 
welcoming stance towards blockchain technology and cryptocurrency.  Japan is well placed for a 
blockchain land administration pilot with a score of 2.54 on the Ease of Blockchain Factor 

--- Page 91 ---
82 
Analysis which puts them in the 91st percentile of all countries measured. Japan, being an island 
and one of the most homogeneous countries in the world should be an ideal jurisdiction for 
blockchain innovation assuming they can overcome incumbent interests.  
The Case of Bermuda 
Bermuda’s blockchain land registry pilot was shelved in November of 2020. The decision 
makers came to the conclusion that “it did not make economic sense to invest more funds into 
changing the database to a blockchain-based one, when the existing electronic database was up 
to the task” (Strangeways, 2020). The Bermudan government had just purchased expense land 
registry software called Landfolio and the implementation establishing digital land records and 
putting them on a blockchain proved to be too much. Bermuda was missing data in some of the 
categories measured so I was unable to obtain a Blockchain Factor Analysis for them.  
The Case of Australia 
Australia scored a 2.31 on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis which puts them in the 
88th percentile of all countries measured. Australia governs their land through a Torrens system, 
coincidentally named after an Australian by the name of Sir Robert Torrens. A Torrens system 
registers ownership with the state rather than requiring the purchaser to prove chain of title for 
previous transactions (Black v Garnock, 2007). Torrens systems lend themselves to blockchain 
based pilots because the information in the registry is assumed to be accurate and the title 
insurance industry is less powerful and is often a government sponsored insurance scheme.   

--- Page 92 ---
 
83 
Australia’s pilot took place in 2018 in the state of New South Wales in coordination with 
the NSW Land Registry Office, ChromaWay Asia Pacific and ChromaWay AB (Bennett, 2021). 
This particular pilot did not focus on the conveyance of land but rather the process of adding or 
removing mortgages from a land title. According to those implementing the process on the 
ground, there are more “discharge of mortgage lien” transactions in any given month than there 
are property conveyance transactions in this particular jurisdiction (Bennett, 2021). Australia 
gives each state the authority to determine land administration so there is no standardized method 
for recording transaction data. Some states use the national PEXA e-conveyance platform, but 
many do not. Currently fewer than one fifth of mortgage lien transactions are fully digital which 
provides ample scope for efficiency gains (Bennett, 2021). While the pilot program was 
successful, NSW Land Registry Services has not yet announced whether it will move to a full-
scale implementation.  
 
The Case of Canada 
Canada scored a 2.35 on the Ease of Blockchain Factor Analysis which puts them in the 
89th percentile of all countries measured. Like Australia, Canada also governs their land through 
a Torrens system. The title industry is not as strong in Canada as in other jurisdictions so in 
addition to a strong score on the index, there are likely fewer well placed incumbents to oppose a 
blockchain land administration pilot.    
The Canadian pilot followed the Australian example by attempting a small niche use case 
within the full land administration context. ChromaWay partnered with the Land Title and 
Survey Authority of British Colombia (LTSA) to organize the “re-sale” of condominium 

--- Page 93 ---
 
84 
properties. This process is required during the construction of condominiums as the bank often 
requires the developer to pre-sell many of the units in order to release funding for construction 
(Bennett, 2021). According to the team of authors who wrote up the academic analysis, some of 
whom work for ChromaWay, “the prototype project was completed, but due to scaling, and 
change management constraints with all the stakeholders and various agencies, the prototype 
approach was not deployed” (Bennett, 2021).   
The Theoretical Explanation  
The adoption and success of blockchain-based land registry systems in developed 
countries compared to developing countries can be analyzed through multiple lenses, including 
technological infrastructure, governance, legal frameworks, and socio-economic factors.  
With regard to technological infrastructure, developed countries are typically more advanced 
with assets such as widespread internet access, high rates of digital literacy, and existing digital 
government services. This infrastructure provides a solid foundation for implementing and 
scaling blockchain technologies. On the other hand, developing countries may lack the necessary 
technological infrastructure, including reliable internet access and digital services, making the 
implementation of blockchain systems more challenging. 
 
Another factor is that of governance and political will. Governance and political will are 
the most significant factor in the success or failure of a land registry pilot as demonstrated by this 
research. Still, the theory suggests that the governance and political will factor is more 
pronounced in developing countries. Developed countries generally have more stable political 
environments and stronger governance structures (Bethell, 1999). There is often greater political 
will to invest in innovative technologies like blockchain for public services, driven by a desire to 

--- Page 94 ---
 
85 
increase efficiency and transparency. Developing Countries endure more political instability and 
have weaker governance structures which can hinder the adoption of new technologies. 
Corruption and a lack of political will to improve land registry systems can also be significant 
barriers. 
Developed Countries have well-established legal and regulatory frameworks that can be 
more readily adapted to new technologies like blockchain (DeSoto, 200). These countries are 
often more proactive in creating legal clarity around blockchain, facilitating its adoption. 
There's generally a higher level of trust in digital technologies and a willingness among the 
populace to engage with digital government services in developed countries. The socio-economic 
environment, including high levels of education and digital literacy, supports the adoption of 
blockchain technologies. Citizens are more likely to understand and trust blockchain-based 
systems. 
Cultural and social barriers, including mistrust in digital systems and a preference for 
traditional land registry methods, can limit the adoption of blockchain technologies in 
developing countries (Smith et al., 2010). Lower levels of education and digital literacy can also 
hinder the population's ability to engage with and trust blockchain-based systems. 
The theory posits that while blockchain technology has the potential to revolutionize land 
registry systems by enhancing transparency, security, and efficiency, its adoption and success are 
heavily influenced by a country's technological infrastructure, governance, legal and regulatory 
frameworks, and socio-economic factors with governance and political considerations being the 
most prominent. Developed countries, with their more favorable conditions in these areas, are 
better positioned to implement and benefit from blockchain-based land registry systems 

--- Page 95 ---
 
86 
compared to developing countries, which face more significant barriers to adoption. The success 
of blockchain based land registry pilots varies by region. In countries with high digital literacy 
and strong institutions, the pilots have been more successful. In lower-income countries with 
weaker institutions and less digital literacy, the pilots have met with fewer successes. Chapter 4 
demonstrates the complexity of technology implementation and innovation in the public sector 
especially as it relates to blockchain for land administration. The true barrier to adoption for this 
technology does not depend on software tweaks or the technical prowess of the implementation 
company, but rather the stakeholder management process and political realities on the ground. 
Chapter 5 unpacks areas of future research that may benefit practitioners as they navigate the 
political challenges of innovating in land administration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 96 ---
 
87 
CHAPTER 5 
CONCLUSIONS, DISCUSSION, AND FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS 
While there are still questions to be answered about the preconditions necessary for 
blockchain technology to underpin land administration recordkeeping, the obstacles that lay in 
the path to success are far more often political than technological. Change management is 
difficult especially for overworked and underpaid public officials and civil servants. Overcoming 
objections from incumbents and those that have incentives to resist efficiency is no small feat 
especially when the benefits of such a transition accrue to the public at large rather than a 
concentrated group of economic actors with an incentive to push for change.  There are classic 
collective action and free rider problems associated with change in the public sector especially 
related to public goods. I would contend that an efficient and transparent property registry is a 
public good since it is both nonexcludable, in functioning democracies, and non-rivalrous.  
The functionality of various blockchains, especially public blockchains, is increasing at a 
rapid rate. Even during the span of time in which this research was conducted, there has been 
tremendous progress. In the period from 2015-2020 there were many academic articles, 
highlighted previously in this paper, that raised technical questions about the functionality of 
blockchains for land administration and the technical challenges that precluded the possibility of 
blockchains being used in that way. Those voices have largely disappeared. It is more common 
now to read that blockchains are falling out of favor for such a use case. If that is true, it is 
primarily a result of many failed attempts at implementing the technology for the purpose of 
securing land records and certainly not the result of a technological shortcoming. The Bitcoin 
blockchain just surpassed 1 billion transactions with tens of trillions of US dollar value 

--- Page 97 ---
 
88 
transacted on that chain. Essentially, Bitcoin is a form of digital property rights and blockchains 
are distributed, digital ledgers. Both at the philosophical level and the granular level, we observe 
that blockchain for land administration is a daunting task due to challenges in process and 
politics, not for challenges in technology. Blockchain for land administration will progress only 
at the pace of land reform in general. Blockchains cannot fix poor data collection or data that is 
missing altogether. Blockchain is not a panacea for the challenges of land governance but rather 
a tool to be employed only when a jurisdiction reaches a certain level of sophistication. This 
paper provides a guide to what forms that sophistication can take but certainly further research is 
needed. The most important conclusion to draw from this research is that technical challenges 
are not the primary obstacle for blockchain based land administration. Rather, it is the political 
and social obstacles to technological disruption, the locus of which is likely to be centered on 
stakeholders who benefit from the status quo. There is a small, determined group of land 
administration officials, title companies, and, in certain cases, corrupt elected officials who are 
the primary obstacles to this change. This group retains the upper hand due to a power imbalance 
between them as incumbents and the entrepreneurs and innovators who may have a foothold but 
little influence in local government. Land reform that incorporates technology may not 
necessarily take advantage of blockchain technology. With technology adoption in the public 
sector there are always points of friction. However, blockchain technology creates increased 
threats to rent seekers and corrupt elected officials due to the transparency of public ledgers and 
the transparency of traction history. “Immutable transactions mean that the transactions or data 
stored in the blockchain are impossible for anyone (government, organizations, or individuals) to 
manipulate, modify, or falsify” (Ledger, 2023).  Blockchains are distributed, digital ledgers and 

--- Page 98 ---
 
89 
ledgers are how we execute land administration. This does not mean that all jurisdictions will 
one day use blockchain for land administration but one would think that jurisdiction globally 
should have researched it and have well-articulated reasons why they are not, or not yet, 
contemplating using blockchains on the backend.  
The survey of global land administration civil servants conducted as part of this research 
further demonstrated that even the civil servants themselves understand where the main obstacles 
are to be found. When asked, who would most likely oppose a blockchain land registry, one of 
the respondents from India thought it would be “Politicians and bureaucrats [since] this is one 
area where corruption exists and blockchains will remove middlemen. Middlemen are created by 
politicians in the system to bring back money to their table. Blockchains will eradicate and can 
remove redundancy and duplication of data. land records are forged sometimes for political 
gains. So, advocating [for] this will be a challenge.” This quote is anecdotal but telling. A greater 
body of evidence is found when we examine the case studies of the pilot programs across the 
developed and developing world. Not in one instance was technological shortcomings listed as 
the primary cause of failure or the cause of a pilot proceeding to full implementation. Sweden is 
the jurisdiction that has found the most success and progressed the farthest, but there is not yet a 
country with a fully operational blockchain land administration system.  
The development of an index and the factor analysis of the variables in the index brought 
further observations to the fore. The internet penetration rate was clearly the most dominant 
factor in the five factors analyzed in the Suitability for Blockchain Land Administration Index. 
Polling and market analysis from the broader digital asset industry confirms that digital literacy 
and internet penetration rates are key to adoption. Having younger populations is an interesting 

--- Page 99 ---
 
90 
indicator of propensity for blockchain adoption. One recommendation for future study is 
analyzing the impact of age demographics as one might expect that countries with younger 
populations would be more likely to see successful blockchain land administration projects. It is 
not a coincidence that countries like Nigeria and Vietnam are seeing the highest per capital 
bitcoin adoption and they could just as easily be jurisdictions where blockchain land 
administration takes hold the fastest.  
Another area for future study is theorizing on ways to overcome the collective action 
challenge of incumbent and political obstacles to a more efficient and transparent land 
administration process. A study that compares other cases of technological innovation to 
examine ways in which obstacles were overcome in those historical cases would be interesting. 
Is there a coalition that might be built that could help provide the basis for building sufficient 
political capital to withstand the objections of entrenched interests and rent seekers. There has 
been only modest innovation in land administration for many decades if one counts GIS as a 
major innovation or even centuries if we take the 1858 introduction of the Torrens system as the 
last major innovation. What kind of a coalition would have the proper incentives to push for 
more transparency and efficiency? This would not only be an interesting theoretical exercise but 
one that would have immediate practical implementation opportunity.  
 
At the conclusion of the process of writing this paper, I received exciting news from 
Ebony Thompson, City Solicitor for the City of Baltimore. She found me at a conference and 
told me that she heard me speak at a Blockchain and Real Estate conference several years ago 
and that my talk inspired her to pursue her vision of using blockchain technology to help 
Baltimore with the challenge of managing and tracking vacant property throughout the city. The 

--- Page 100 ---
91 
American Land Title Association issued a press release on the topic on January 11, 2024. The 
CEO of Medici Land Governance, Ali El-Husseini, said of the project, “the blockchain will 
make it more efficient for title companies to issue policies. He added that accurately identifying 
vacant properties and their ownership will augment the city’s targeted interventions and 
community development efforts (ALTA.org, 2024).  
Imagine a future where real property is secured through code, math and 
cryptography instead of corruptible, or merely error prone officials. Imagine a future where one 
can conduct a real estate deal with the transaction cost accounting for just 1% of the value of that 
transaction. Imagine a future where everyone, not just those the well off, could seamlessly secure 
their property rights in the oldest and most ubiquitous asset in history. We are currently not near 
this end state. Much work is yet to be done, but there is great prosperity to be gained by such an 
outcome. The title of Tom Bethell’s book on property rights provides a fitting aspirational 
charge; The Noblest Triumph: Property and Prosperity Through the Ages. Another book that 
inspired this research, Hernando DeSoto’s Mystery of Capital, highlights the underperformance 
of much of the world’s real estate. As was noted in the abstract to this research, there are $20 
Trillion dollars of real estate owned by the world’s poor that is illiquid, underproducing, and 
ineligible to be used as collateral for loans because it is either improperly titled or not titled at all. 
The potential to unlock tremendous improvements in human flourishing around the world 
necessitates further research and experimentation to incorporate technology into the governance 
and administration of the world’s oldest asset class. 

--- Page 101 ---
 
92 
REFERENCES  
Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. (2006). Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective. 
American Political Science Review, 100(1), 115–131. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055406062046  
Akkermans, B. “Property Law.” Introduction to Law: Second Edition. Springer International 
Publishing, 2017. 79–108. Web. 
ALTA.org. (2024). Baltimore to Establish Blockchain Platform for Vacant Properties. Retrieved 
from https://www.alta.org/news-and-publications/news/20240111-Baltimore-to-
Establish-Blockchain-Platform-for-Vacant-Properties 
Andhra government to adopt blockchain tech to end land record tampering. (2019). The New 
Indian Express. Retrieved December 30, 2020, from 
https://www.newindianexpress.com/states/andhra-pradesh/2019/dec/15/andhra-
government-to-adopt-blockchain-tech-to-end-land-record-tampering-2076359.html 
Aristotle. (350 B.C.E.) The Politics of Aristotle, translated by E. Barker (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1946). 
Aristotle, & McKeon, R. (1941). The basic works of Aristotle. New York: Random House. 
Avantaggiato, M. and Gallo, P. (2019). "Challenges and Opportunities using MultiChain for Real 
Estate," IEEE International Black Sea Conference on Communications and Networking 
(BlackSeaCom), Sochi, Russia, 2019, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/BlackSeaCom.2019.8812780. 
Avramov, Yuriy Valentinovich et al. (2017). “Registering Property: Using Information to Curb 
Corruption.” World Bank, December 1, 2017. Available at 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/e n/270331513854675950/Registeringproperty-
using-information-to-curbcorruption   
Baird, L., Harmon, M., and Madsen, P. (2018). Hedera: A Governing Council and Public 
Hashgraph Network. Whitepaper v.1.4 https://www.hedera.com/hh-whitepaper-v1.4-
181017.pdf Accessed 12/3/18. 
Barbieri, M. & Gassen, D. (2017). Blockchain: Can this new technology really revolutionize the 
land registry system? World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty. 
Barnes, G., Stanfield, D., & Barthel, K. (1999). LAND REGISTRATION MODERNIZATION 
IN DEVELOPING ECONOMIES: A DISCUSSION OF THE MAIN PROBLEMS IN 
CENTRAL/EASTERN EUROPE, LATIN AMERICA, AND THE CARIBBEAN. 
URISA Annual Conference. Retrieved May 30, 2019, from 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.522.6053&rep=rep1&type=pdf  

--- Page 102 ---
 
93 
Baum, A. 2017. “Oxford Future of Real Estate Initiative | Saïd Business School.” 
https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/research/centres-and-initiatives/oxford-future-real-estate-
initiative (February 13, 2020). 
Bahney, Anna and Goldman, David (2024). Retrieved from 
https://www.cnn.com/2024/03/15/economy/nar-realtor-commissions-
settlement/index.html 
Baydakova, Anna. (2018). Wyoming County Moves to Put Land Records on Blockchain. 
CoinDesk. https://www.coindesk.com/wyoming-county-moves-to-put-land-records-on-
blockchain 
BenBen. (n.d.). Retrieved December 30, 2020, from http://www.benben.com.gh/services 
Bennett, R.; Miller, T.;    Pickering, M.; Kara, A.‐K. Hybrid Approaches for Smart Contracts in 
Land Administration: Lessons from Three Blockchain Proofs‐of‐Concept. Land 2021, 10, 
220. https://doi.org/10.3390/land10020220 
Besley, Timothy. (1995). "Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence 
from Ghana," Journal of Political Economy 103, no. 5 (Oct., 1995): 903-937. 
Besley, T. J., & Burgess, R. (2000, May). Land Reform, Poverty Reduction, and Growth: 
Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2), 389–430. 
Besley, T. and Ghatak, M. (2009) Property rights and economic development. In: D. Rodrik and 
M. Rosenzweig, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, 1st ed. Elsevier, pp.4525–
4595. 
Bethell, Tom. (1999). The Noblest Triumph. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
Bjørnskov C., Foss N. (2010) Economic Freedom and Entrepreneurial Activity: Some Cross-
Country Evidence. In: Freytag A., Thurik R. (eds) Entrepreneurship and Culture. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Black v. Garnock (2007). HCA 31 (2007) 230 CLR 438 at pg. 461 Australian High Court.  
Blockchain Land Title Project “Stalls” in Honduras. (2015, December 26). CoinDesk. 
https://www.coindesk.com/debate-factom-land-title-honduras 
Boot, Patrick. (2020). Wyoming Issues Second Crypto Bank Charter. The National Law Review. 
Retrieved December 31, 2020, from https://www.natlawreview.com/article/wyoming-
issues-second-crypto-bank-charter 
Brasselle, A.-S., Gaspart, F. and Platteau, J.-P., (2002) Land tenure security and investment 
incentives: puzzling evidence from Burkina Faso. Journal of Development Economics, 
67(2), pp.373–418 

--- Page 103 ---
94 
Brasselle, A.-S., Gaspart, F. and Platteau, J.-P., (2002) Land tenure security and investment 
incentives: puzzling evidence from Burkina Faso. Journal of Development Economics, 
67(2), pp.373–418 Casey, Michael and Vigna, Paul. (2018). The Truth Machine: The 
Blockchain and the Future of Everything. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
Bratcher, Lee and Sullivan, Rob. (2021). Blockchain land registry best practices. Submitted to 
the World Bank Land and Poverty Conference. Retrieved from 
https://mycoordinates.org/blockchain-land-registry-best-practices/ 
Buterin, V. (2017, February 6). The Meaning of Decentralization. Medium. 
https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/the-meaning-of-decentralization-a0c92b76a274 
Casey, Michael. & Vigna, Paul.  (2018). The truth machine: the blockchain and the future of 
everything.  New York :  St. Martin's Press 
CCRD Releases Blockchain Pilot Final Report. (2017). Cook County Recorder of Deeds - 
Edward Moody. https://www.cookrecorder.com/ccrd-releases-blockchain-pilot-final-
report/  
Ceyhun Haydaroğlu, The Relationship between Property Rights and Economic Growth: an 
Analysis of OECD and EU Countries, DANUBE: Law and Economics Review, 6, 4, 
(2015). 
Chavez-Dreyfuss, Gertrude. 2015. “Honduras to Build Land Title Registry Using Bitcoin 
Technology.” Reuters India. Accessed 13 August 2015. 
http://in.reuters.com/article/2015/05/15/usa-honduras-
technologyidINKBN0O01V720150515. 
Clague, C., Keefer, P., Knack, S. et al. Contract-Intensive Money: Contract Enforcement, 
Property Rights, and Economic Performance. Journal of Economic Growth (1999) 4: 185. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009854405184  
CNBCTV (2022). Blockchain & Governments: A Look at How Colombia is using Blockchain 
Technology to Store and Maintain Records of its Land Deeds. Retrieved from 
https://www.cnbctv18.com/cryptocurrency/blockchain--governments-a-look-at-how-
colombia-is-using-blockchain-technology-to-store-and-maintain-records-of-its-land-
deeds-14338822.htm 
Coin Rivet. (2018). Colombia launches time-saving blockchain land registry pilot project. 
https://coinrivet.com/colombia-launches-a-time-saving-blockchain-land-registry-pilot-
project/ 
Coit, C. S. (1989). Introduction to real estate law. Chicago: Real Estate Education. 
Collindres, J., Regan M., Panting, G. (2016). Using Blockchain to Secure Honduran Land Titles. 
Fundacion Eleutera. 

--- Page 104 ---
 
95 
ConsenSys. 2019. “Deloitte: 80% of Businesses See Blockchain as a Strategic Priority.” 
Medium. https://media.consensys.net/deloitte-80-of-businesses-see-blockchain-as-a-
strategic-priority-e8c89cb0a57f (February 13, 2020). 
Copeland, Rick. (n.d.). Transitioning to a Strong Sustainable Host Country Economy. U.S. Army 
Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute. 
Copeland, Rick. (n.d.). Strategic Imperative for Host Country Economic Capacity Building: 
“Unity of Understanding.” U.S. Army Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute. 
Currier, Andy. (2020). Land Unchained? Will Blockchain Technology Unlock the Economic 
Value of Land? Oaklandinstitute.Org. Retrieved December 30, 2020, from 
https://www.oaklandinstitute.org/blog/land-unchained  
Davidson, Sinclair, Primavera De Filippi, and Jason Potts. 2016. “Economics of Blockchain.” In 
Public Choice Conference, Fort Lauderdale, United States. https://hal.archives-
ouvertes.fr/hal-01382002 (February 14, 2020). 
Deininger, K., Augustinus C., Enemark S., and Munro-Faure, P. (2010). Innovation in Land 
Rights Recognition, Administration, and Governance. The International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank. Washington, D.C. 
Demarest, G. (2009). Property & peace: insurgency, strategy and the statute of frauds. Fort 
Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office. 
DeSoto, H. (2000). The mystery of Capital: Why capitalism triumphs in the West and fails 
everywhere else. New York: Basic Books. 
DeSoto, H. (2013). Thoughts on the Importance of Boundaries. Proceedings of the American 
Philosophical Society, 157(1), 22-31. 
Eckstein, H. (n.d.). Case Study and Theory in Political Science. Case Study Method, 118-164. 
doi:10.4135/9780857024367.d11 
Eder, G. (2019). Digital Transformation: Blockchain and Land Titles. 12. OECD Global Anti-
Corruption and Integrity Forum. 
Fenske, J. (2011) Land tenure and investment incentives: Evidence from West Africa. Journal of 
Development Economics, 95, pp.137–156 
Field, E., & Torero, M. (2006). Do property titles increase credit access among the urban poor? 
Evidence from a nationwide titling program. Harvard University. 
Forbes Africa. (2023). RWANDA: Africa’s Silicon Valley. Retrieved from 
https://www.forbesafrica.com/contrarian/2023/02/20/rwanda-africas-silicon-valley/ 
Frankenfield, Jake. (2019). “Smart Contracts: What You Need to Know.” Investopedia. 
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/smart-contracts.asp (February 20, 2020). 

--- Page 105 ---
 
96 
Frumkin, Daniel. (2022). The Bitcoin Mining Handbook. Braiins Systems. ISBN 978-80-
907975-9-8 
Ghana Web. (2018). Blockchain technology to revolutionise land administration processes. 
https://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHomePage/business/Blockchain-technology-to-
revolutionise-land-administration-processes-666920 
Gonzalez, Francisco. (2005). Effective Property Rights, Conflict and Growth. Department of 
Economics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 1N4.Received 21 August 
2003, Revised 15 July 2005, Available online 7 November 2005. 
Gonzalez, Mary Lisbeth. 2018. Honduras - Land Administration and Information Systems 
Project (English). Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group. 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/879981516734844931/Honduras-Land-
Administration-and-Information-Systems-Project  
Graglia, J. M., & Mellon, C. (2018). Blockchain and Property in 2018: At the End of the 
Beginning. Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 12(1-2), 90-116. 
doi:10.1162/inov_a_00270 
Guide, G. P. (n.d.). Search Global Property Guide. Retrieved from 
https://www.globalpropertyguide.com/transaction-costs 
Hanus, P. (2013). Correction of location of boundaries in cadastre modernization process. 
Geodesy and Cartography, 62(1), 51-65. doi:10.2478/geocart-2013-0003  
Haydarolgu, Ceyhun. (2015). The Relationship Between Property Rights and Economic Growth: 
An Analysis of OECD and EU Countries. Law and Economics Review 6 (4), 217-239 
DOI: 10.1515/danb-2015-0014  
Hayek, F. A. (1973). Law, legislation and liberty: A new testament of the liberal principles of 
justice and political economy. Chicago (Ill.): University of Chicago Press. 
Heaver, I. (2024). What Crypto Investors Need To Know About Tokenizing Real World Assets. 
Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/irinaheaver/2024/03/14/what-crypto-
investors-need-to-know-about-tokenizing-real-world-assets/?sh=11f72d2a5a96 
Hardin, Garrett. (1968). The Tragedy of the Common. Science, Vol. 162, Issue 3859. pp. 1243-
1248. DOI: 10.1126/science.162.3859.1243  
Heitger, B. (2004). Property Rights and the Wealth of Nations: A Cross-Country Study. The 
Cato Journal 23 (3): 381-402. 
Henley, Giles. (2013). Property Rights and Development Briefing: Property Rights and Rural 
Household Welfare. UK Overseas Development Institute (ODI). London, United 
Kingdom. 

--- Page 106 ---
 
97 
Hobbes, T., edited by: Malcolm, N. (2012). Leviathan. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
“IBM Blockchain - Enterprise Blockchain Solutions & Services | IBM.” 
https://www.ibm.com/blockchain  (February 13, 2020). 
Hines, B. (2021). Digital finance: Security tokens and unlocking the real potential of blockchain. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Huth, M. (2017). ZAMBIA CUSTOMARY LAND DOCUMENTATION TENURE 
ASSESSMENT. 35. USAID Tenure and Global Climate Change Project. https://land-
links.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/02/USAID_LAND_TENURE_TGCC_ASSESSMENT_ZAMBIA_
CUSTOMARY_LAND_DOCUMENTATION.pdf  
Kaczorowska, M. (2019). Blockchain-based Land Registration: Possibilities and Challenges. 
Masaryk University Journal of Law and Technology, 13(2), 339–360. 
https://doi.org/10.5817/MUJLT2019-2-8 
Japan’s first blockchain real estate transactions recorded by Propy. (2019, April 11). 
CryptoNinjas.Net. https://www.cryptoninjas.net/2019/04/11/japans-first-blockchain-real-
estate-transactions-recorded-by-propy/ 
Kanojia, Sanjay. (2015). Why the Modi Government must work on Land Reform before Land 
Acquistion. Scroll.in. Accessed December 8, 2018. https://scroll.in/article/741036/why-
the-modi-government-must-work-on-land-reform-before-land-acquisition 
Kim, Christine. (2018). Sweden’s Land Registry Demos Live Transaction on a Blockchain. 
CoinDesk. https://www.coindesk.com/sweden-demos-live-land-registry-transaction-on-a-
blockchain 
Kirby, T. (2015). A Humble Update on the Honduras Title Project. Factom. 
https://www.factom.com/uncategorized/a-humble-update-on-the-honduras-title-project/ 
 
Konashevych, O. (2020). General Concept of Real Estate Tokenization on Blockchain, European 
Property Law Journal , 9(1), 21-66. doi: https://doi.org/10.1515/eplj-2020-0003 
Konashevych, O. (2020). "Cross-blockchain protocol for public registries", International Journal 
of Web Information Systems, Vol. 16 No. 5, pp. 571-610. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJWIS-
07-2020-0045 
Konashevych, O. (2020). "Constraints and benefits of the blockchain use for real estate and 
property rights", Journal of Property, Planning and Environmental Law, Vol. 12 No. 2, 
pp. 109-127. https://doi.org/10.1108/JPPEL-12-2019-0061 
 

--- Page 107 ---
 
98 
Konashevych, O. and Poblet, M. (2019). Blockchain Anchoring of Public Registries: Options 
and Challenges. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Theory and 
Practice of Electronic Governance (ICEGOV2019). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 317–323. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3326365.3326406  
Kusago, T. (2005). Post-conflict pro-poor private-sector development: The case of Timor-
Leste. Development In Practice, 15(3/4), 502-513. doi:10.1080/09614520500075995. 
LACChain Alliance. (2020, March 5). What is the LACChain global alliance? Medium. 
https://medium.com/@lacchain.official/what-is-the-lacchain-global-alliance-and-what-
does-it-consist-of-861cb76257b1  
Lapuente, V. and Suzuki, K. (2020), Politicization, Bureaucratic Legalism, and Innovative 
Attitudes in the Public Sector. Public Admin Rev, 80: 454-
467. https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.13175 
Larsson, G. 1991. Land Registration and Cadastral Systems. New York: Longman Scientific and 
Technical. 
Ledger Insights. (2019, October 29). Inter-American Development Bank contracts ChromaWay 
for blockchain land registry. Ledger Insights - Enterprise Blockchain. 
https://www.ledgerinsights.com/inter-american-development-bank-idb-blockchain-land-
registry-chromway/  
Lemieux, Victoria Louise. (2016) "Trusting records: is Blockchain technology the answer?", 
Records Management Journal, Vol. 26 Issue: 2, pp.110-139, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/RMJ-12-2015-0042 
Research and Markets. (2023). Global Real Estate Market Report 2023: A $6.13 Trillion Market 
by 2030 - Size, Share, Growth Analysis, Competitive Analysis, & Industry Forecasts. 
Retrieved from https://www.globenewswire.com/news-
release/2023/05/29/2677723/0/en/Global-Real-Estate-Market-Report-2023-A-6-13-
Trillion-Market-by-2030-Size-Share-Growth-Analysis-Competitive-Analysis-Industry-
Forecasts.html 
 
Meyer, D. (2017). Russia experiments with using blockchain tech for land registry. ZDNet. 
Retrieved January 21, 2021, from https://www.zdnet.com/article/russia-experiments-
with-using-blockchain-tech-for-land-registry/ 
 
Milgrom, P. R., North, D. C., & Weingast, B. R. (1990). The role of institutions in the revival of 
trade: The law merchant, private judges, and the champagne pairs. Stanford, CA: , 
Hoover Institution, Stanford University. 

--- Page 108 ---
 
99 
Moyo, Dambisa. (2009) Dead aid :why aid is not working and how there is a better way for 
Africa. Vancouver : Douglas & Mcintyre, 
Mwanza, K. & Wilkins, H., (2018). Reuters.com. [Online] Available at: 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-africa-landrights-blockchain/africanstartups-bet-on-
blockchain-to-tackle-land-fraud-idUSKCN1G00YK  
 
Nakamoto, S. (2009). Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Accessed 11/24/18. 
https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf. 
Ngo, Diana. (2017). Blockchain Proptech Startup Propy Signs Deal With Ukraine Government. 
Coin Journal. https://coinjournal.net/news/blockchain-proptech-startup-propy-signs-deal-
ukraine-government/ 
North, D. C., & Thomas, R. P. (2009). The rise of the Western world: A new economic history. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr. 
Olson, M. (2000). Power and Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist and Capitalist Dictatorships. 
Basic Books. New York, NY. 
Olson, M. (1993). Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development. American Political Science 
Review, 87(3), 567-576. doi:10.2307/2938736. 
Olson, M. (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press. 9780674537514 
Ostrom, E. (2003). How Types of Goods and Property Rights Jointly Affect Collective Action. 
Journal of Theoretical Politics, 15(3), 239-270. 
Overstock.com. (2019, May 22). Medici Land Governance Signs MOU with Lusaka City, 
Zambia to Develop and Deploy a Land Governance Platform and Support Property Title 
Issuance. GlobeNewswire News Room. http://www.globenewswire.com/news-
release/2019/05/22/1840827/0/en/Medici-Land-Governance-Signs-MOU-with-Lusaka-
City-Zambia-to-Develop-and-Deploy-a-Land-Governance-Platform-and-Support-
Property-Title-Issuance.html  
Popper, Nathaniel (2017). "Bitcoin price surges after deal on software updates". The Boston 
Globe. Retrieved March 8, 2021.  
Preece, Elliot. (2018). Blockchain as the Future of Land Registry in Latin America. ABC 
Money. https://www.abcmoney.co.uk/2018/06/20/blockchain-as-the-future-of-land-
registry-in-latin-america/ 
Pritzker, Y. (2019). Inventing bitcoin: The technology behind the first truly scarce and 
decentralized money explained.  

--- Page 109 ---
 
100 
Propy. (2019). Vermont Goes Blockchain Because of Propy. Propy Blog. 
https://propy.com/blog/vermont-goes-blockchain-because-of-propy/ 
RAND Corporation (2009). Guidebook for Supporting Economic Development in Stability 
Operations. RAND Corporation. Santa Monica, CA. 
Richardson, C. J. (2005). The Loss of Property Rights and The Collapse of Zimbabwe. Cato 
Journal, 25(3), 541–565. 
Ricketts, M. (2005). Poverty, Institutions, and Economics: Hernando DeSoto on Property Rights 
and Economic Development. Economic Affairs, 25: 49-51. doi:10.1111/j.1468-
0270.2005.00552.x 
Rodrik, D. (2004). Getting Institutions Right. CESIFO DICE Report, 2(2), 10–15. 
Rodrik, D. (2000) Trade Policy Reform as Institutional Reform in Handbook on "Developing 
Countries and the Next Round of WTO Negotiations," edited by Bernard 
HoekmanSelvetti, C. 2012. Rapid review of the literature on Property Rights - 31 October 
2012. DfID 
Rizzo, Pete. (2015). Blockchain Land Title Project “Stalls” in Honduras. CoinDesk. 
https://www.coindesk.com/debate-factom-land-title-honduras 
 
Scott, B (2016). How Can Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Technology Play a Role in Building 
Social and Solidarity Finance? United Nations Research Institute for Social Development 
No. 2016-1. 
Seso Global. (n.d.) Blockchain-based Property Register – Cape Town, South Africa – SESO.  
Retrieved December 31, 2020, from 
https://seso.global/aboutus/index.php/2020/07/10/blockchain-based-property-register/ 
Shang, Q., & Price, A. (2019). A BLOCKCHAIN- BASED LAND TITLING PROJECT IN 
THE REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA. Innovations: Technology, Governance, 
Globalization 2019; 12 (3-4): 72–78.  
Shuaib, Mohammed & Alam, Shadab & Ahmed, Rafeeq & Qamar, Shamimul & Nasir, 
Mohammed & Alam, Mohammad. (2022). Current Status, Requirements, and Challenges 
of Blockchain Application in Land Registry. International Journal of Information 
Retrieval Research. 12. 10.4018/IJIRR.299934. 
Smita, Sinha. (2018). How Andhra Pradesh is emerging as India’s blockchain hub. Analytics 
India. Accessed December 8, 2018. https://www.analyticsindiamag.com/how-andhra-
pradesh-is-emerging-as-indias-blockchain-hub/ 
Small, M. L., Harding, D. J., & Lamont, M. (2010). Reconsidering culture and poverty. The 
ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 629(1), 6–27. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0002716210362077  

--- Page 110 ---
 
101 
Snall, M. (2017). Blockchain and the Land Register: A New “Trust Machine”? World Bank 
Conference on Land and Poverty. 
Strangeways, Sam. (2020). Blockchain land title registry plan ditched. Retrieved January 21, 
2021, from https://www.royalgazette.com/news/article/20201130/blockchain-land-title-
registry-plan-ditched/ 
Sylwester, K. (2001). A Model of institutional formation within a rent seeking environment. 
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 44, 169-176. 
Takyar, Akash. (2019). Blockchain Land Registry Platform—Reducing Frauds and Delays. 
LeewayHertz-Software Development Company. 
https://www.leewayhertz.com/blockchain-land-registry-platform/ 
Tembo, E., Minango, J., & Sommerville, M. (2016). Zambia’s National Land Titling 
Programme- challenges and opportunities. 14. 
Teng, J. (2000). Endogenous authoritarian property rights. Journal of Public Economics, 77, 81-
95. 
Thakur, V., Doja, M., Dwivedi, Y., Ahmad, T., & Khadanga, G. (2020). Land records on 
Blockchain for implementation of Land Titling in India. International Journal of 
Information Management, 52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.04.013 
Themistocleous, M. (2018). Blockchain Technology and Land Registry. Cyprus Review, 30(2). 
Retrieved May 30, 2019. 
The quest for secure property rights in Africa. (2020, September 12). The Economist. 
https://www.economist.com/middle-east-and-africa/2020/09/12/the-quest-for-secure-
property-rights-in-africa 
 
Thompson Reuters Foundation. (2016). Millions of land, property cases stuck in court. Accessed 
December 8, 2018. https://www.deccanchronicle.com/nation/current-
affairs/090816/millions-of-land-property-cases-stuck-in-indian-courts.html  
Transparency International. (2009). Global corruption barometer 2009. Berlin: Transparency 
International. 
UN-FIG. (1996). Bogor Declaration on Cadastral Reform. Report from United Nations 
Interregional Meeting of Experts on the Cadastre, Bogor, Indonesia, 18-22 March, 1996. 
A joint initiative of the International Federation of Surveyors (FIG) and the United 
Nations. http://www.sli.unimelb.edu.au/research/publications/IPW_publ.html.  
Van Valkenburgh, Peter. (2020). What is Bitcoin mining, and why is it necessary? Retrieved 
from https://www.coincenter.org/education/advanced-topics/mining/ on April 19, 2024.  

--- Page 111 ---
102 
Vos, J. (2017). Blockchain Based Land Administration: Feasible, Illusory, or a Panacea? World 
Bank Conference on Land and Poverty. Washington DC, March 20-24, 2017. 
Who owns what? (2020, September 12). The Economist. 
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2020/09/12/who-owns-what 
Williamson, Enemark, Wallace, and Rajabifard. (2009). Land Administration Systems for 
Sustainable Development. ESRI Press. 
Williamson, P (n.d.). The Evolution of Modern Cadastres. Director, United Nations Liaison, 
International Federation of Surveyors. The University of Melbourne Victoria, Australia. 
World Bank. (2017). “Why Secure Land Rights Matter.” World Bank text/HTML, March 24, 
2017. Available at http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/land 
World Bank. (2016). Doing Business 2016: Measuring Regulatory Quality and Efficiency. 
World Bank, 2015, p. 211. Available at https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-0667-4. 

--- Page 112 ---
103 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
Lee Bratcher is the President and Founder of the Texas Blockchain Council. The Texas 
Blockchain Council is an industry association with more than 100 member companies and 
hundreds of individuals that seek to make Texas the jurisdiction of choice for Bitcoin and 
blockchain innovation. The TBC helped to research two pieces of blockchain legislation that 
were passed in the 87th Legislative session and an additional two bills in the 88th Session that 
were signed into effect by Governor Abbott. Lee and the TBC team have a specific focus on the 
regulatory environment around Bitcoin mining in Texas. The TBC hosted the Texas Blockchain 
Summit in Austin at which speakers like Senator Ted Cruz, Senator Cynthia Lummis and SEC 
Commissioner Hester Peirce addressed the sold-out audience. He is also a Captain in the US 
Army reserves working as Tech Scout for the 75th Innovation Command that supports Army 
Futures Command. Formerly, Lee was a political science professor at Dallas Baptist University 
teaching international relations with a research emphasis on property rights.  
Lee was awarded a master’s in International Relations from St. Mary’s University and is in his 
ninth year as a PhD candidate at UT Dallas with a research emphasis on blockchain land 
registries. Lee lives in Richardson, TX with his wife Becca and their three daughters.  

--- Page 113 ---
CURRICULUM VITAE 
Lee E. Bratcher 
lee@texasblockchaincouncil.org 
______________________________________________________________________________
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE 
President and Founder, Texas Blockchain Council 
Dec. 2019 - Present 
•
Established and built the Texas Blockchain Council from its inception to an influential
industry association that impacted policy and drafted legislation for the 87th and 88th Texas
Legislatures.
•
Recruited 100+ dues-paying corporate member companies and several hundred individual
members to participate in the association driving triple digit revenue growth. 2019 Revenue
$0 - 2023 Revenue $3M. Manage a team of 7 employees, lobbyists, and contractors.
•
Built relationships with members of the Texas Legislature and heads of Texas State Agencies
and established TBC as the authority on blockchain policy matters in Texas and the nation.
•
TBC Videos: Conversation with Gov. Greg Abbott; TBC 2023 Summit Recap;  What is the
Texas Blockchain Council.
Executive Director, Institute for Global Engagement, Dallas Baptist University        2019 - 2021 
•
Managed the Institute’s team, budget, work product, and set strategic vision.
•
Engage US military, political, and business leaders to speak at IGE-sponsored Leadership
Lecture Series. Recent guests include Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis, Boeing Government
Services President Ed Dolanski and Mathilde Mukantabana, the Rwandan Ambassador to the
U.S.
Department Chair, Politics, Philosophy, and Economics (PPE), Dallas Baptist University  Aug. 
2015 - 2021 
•
Administer class scheduling, curriculum changes, and adjunct faculty recruitment for the PPE
program.
•
Recruit and advise all PPE students and develop curriculum and programming for the PPE
Society.
Assistant Professor of Political Science, Dallas Baptist University 
•
Drove research initiative demonstrating blockchain technology’s potential in the real estate
space.
•
Teach Political Science, International Relations, and Blockchain courses.
•
Published papers include: “Blockchain Land Registry Best Practices” 2019 World Bank
Annual Conference on Land and Poverty) and “Military Cooperation with UN Police” (2017,
U.S. Army War College).
104

--- Page 114 ---
Army Officer, CPT: 75th Innovation Command   
July 
2010- Present  
•
Served as a Tech Scout for the 75th Innovation Command supporting Army Futures
Command.
•
Previously: ROTC Instructor at UT Dallas and Dallas Baptist University. Three Office
Evaluation Reports have been “top blocks” (above peers).
•
Secret Security Clearance.
•
Trained in personnel management, mediation, government contracts, convoy operations, and
cross-cultural communication.
•
Previous unit: 490th CA BN Dallas, TX.
•
Air Assault Qualified.
•
Graduated 2 (Distinguished Military Graduate) out of 100 on the OCS OML at Fort Benning
in 2011.
EDUCATION 
University of Texas Dallas 
•
PhD, Political Science. (ABD / all but dissertation)
•
Dissertation: Blockchain and Property Rights – How Blockchain Technology Can
Transform Land Registries.
IMB Watson Research Center: Blockchain instructors' certification. Weeklong training in New 
York, 2019.    
St. Mary’s University 
•
MA, International Relations (2014)
Dallas Baptist University 
•
BA, History (2010)
SKILLS 
•
Business development, sales, leading diverse teams in strategic and tactical discussions,
project management, excellent written and oral communications skills, public speaking, and
proficiency in a variety of productivity and contract management software.
MEMBERSHIPS 
•
The Politics, Philosophy, and Economics Society (2017 – Present)
•
Richardson Chamber of Commerce
•
Dallas Chamber of Commerce
•
Texas Work Group on Blockchain Matters appointed by Speaker of the Texas House
105
