
--- Page 1 ---
ifrc.org
GLOBAL PAYMENT 
SOLUTIONS FOR 
HUMANITARIAN 
CASH ASSISTANCE
December 2022

--- Page 2 ---
© International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Geneva, 2022
Copies of all or part of this report may be made for non-commercial use, providing the source is acknowledged. The 
IFRC would appreciate receiving details of its use. Requests for commercial reproduction should be directed 
to the IFRC at secretariat@ifrc.org.
Cover photo: Afghanistan 2022,  Families in Patika province who have been severely impacted by the 
earthquake and who have lost their livelihoods are being provided with assistance through unconditional 
cash grants from the Afghan Red Crescent Society. Cash assistance has proven to be a quick, safe, reliable 
and efficient way to support vulnerable communities in the wake of disasters. It allows people to determine 
for themselves what their most urgent needs are. © Meer Abdullah/IFRC
Address: Chemin des Crêts 17, Petit-Saconnex, 1209 Geneva, Switzerland   
Postal address: P.O. Box 303, 1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland 
T  +41 (0)22 730 42 22  |  F  +41 (0)22 730 42 00  |  E  secretariat@ifrc.org  |  W  ifrc.org

--- Page 3 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
4
Introduction
5
Needs for a global payment solution
7
Defining a global payment solution
9
Models for a global payment solution
13
1. Aggregator model
13
2. A suite of payment solutions 
14
3. Partnerships with multinational companies
15
Engagement with the private sector solution providers
16
Considerations for implementing a global payment solution
18
Costs 
18
Duration of use
18
Preference of end users
19
Differences in local implementation
19
Integration with data management
20
Challenging contexts
20
Case studies
24
COVID-19 pandemic
24
Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
25
Lebanon complex humanitarian crisis 
26
Recommendations
27
Conclusion
29
Annexes
31
Annex 1: Methodology and approach
31
Annex 2: Shortlisted countries and sample payment providers
32

--- Page 4 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report was made possible by funding from European Civil Protection and Humanitarian 
Aid Operations (ECHO).
Thanks are also due to the authors Joseph Oliveros and Talha Leghari, and to all the 
interviewees and reviewers for their generous contributions.
Kenya 2020.  A community member in Isiolo receives a text 
message confirming successful registration for the Kenya 
Red Cross Society’s cash programme where two payments 
will be sent via M-PESA mobile money. 
© Kenya Red Cross Society and Netherlands Red Cross

--- Page 5 ---
Introduction   |   5
INTRODUCTION
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) commissioned 
a study to validate the need for a global payment solution and the feasibility of implementing 
such a solution to enable scalable and faster distribution of humanitarian cash assistance 
during emergencies. This report outlines the findings and observations based on 
consultations with over 30 representatives from the Red Cross Red Crescent Movement, 
other humanitarian organizations and the private sector1. The insights from this report 
aim at informing the IFRC and other humanitarian actors on the opportunities for a global 
payment solution, models for such solutions, and key risks and considerations for 
implementation. Additionally, this report aims at providing insights and encouraging 
financial service providers (FSP), fintech2 in general, and other private sector actors to use 
their expertise, innovative solutions and services to help address the challenges of 
humanitarian actors such as the IFRC when scaling up cash assistance. 
The IFRC has an ambitious goal of reaching 50 per cent of its humanitarian assistance using 
cash and vouchers by 2025 and has identified the lengthy process of procuring FSPs during 
emergencies as one of the barriers to reaching this goal. Cash preparedness is crucial in this 
scale-up strategy, where an important activity involves National Societies establishing 
framework agreements with FSPs. Efforts have increased to support more National Societies 
over the years; however, cash preparedness activities take time while, at the same time, 
disasters and crisis events are growing and their impacts getting more severe. 
The IFRC has a payment solution for the Americas region using prepaid cards that may be 
topped up with monetary value remotely once the cards are shipped to the country 
affected by the disaster or crisis. This has been in use since 2014 and has proven effective 
and quick in disbursing cash during emergencies supported by the IFRC. The concept of a 
global payment solution was inspired by this regional prepaid card option. But expanding 
this regional solution to address global needs is not so simple given the varying contexts, 
cultures, infrastructure, compliance and regulations, as well as the geographical coverage 
required to cater beyond one region. 
1. Consultations with the private sector were focused on financial service providers that are able to provide multi-country or multi-region 
services and not meant to be exhaustive in terms of the types of payment solutions offered.
2. Fintech, or “financial technology” is a fast-growing area with companies using new technologies to deliver financial services.

--- Page 6 ---
6     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Nigeria 2022. Affected persons in Lafia,  
Benue State, count their money after cash 
distribution following the Nigeria Hunger  
Crisis appeal.
© Aduratomi Bolade/IFRC

--- Page 7 ---
Needs for a global payment solution   |   7
NEEDS FOR A GLOBAL  
PAYMENT SOLUTION
When COVID-19 infections surged in early 2020, the IFRC launched a global emergency 
appeal to support National Societies in their response to this pandemic. About 60 of the 
192 member National Societies included Cash and Voucher Assistance (CVA) in their 
response plans and another 10 were evaluating the feasibility of using CVA in their specific 
contexts3. But only 41 National Societies were able to distribute cash within the first six 
months of the emergency. National Societies that were prepared and have established 
agreements with FSPs and experience using CVA were able to quickly provide cash 
assistance to address basic needs and socio-economic impacts. 
According to the IFRC’s COVID-19 12-month emergency operational update report4, “one 
of the challenges in delivering cash with many National Societies was the lack of pre-
agreements in place with FSPs and the need to ensure that they were flexible for this 
emergency and compatible with IFRC procurement standards. It typically takes up to six 
months to establish an agreement with any FSP, including a formal tender process and 
due diligence exercise”. 
The COVID-19 pandemic was one example of an emergency that has global or multi-
country impacts. The current hunger crisis in Africa is affecting 23 countries with over 120 
million people in need of immediate support. There, the IFRC and its members are focusing 
on 12 priority countries with emergency assistance. Indeed, according to the IFRC’s World 
Disasters Report 20205, the rise of extreme weather and climate-related events is expected 
to continue unless more action towards climate adaptation and mitigation are done. Rise 
in conflicts and civil unrest such as in Afghanistan and recently in Ukraine are also causing 
forced displacements, where neighbouring National Societies must prepare to support 
the influx of people moving in or through their countries for safety. IFRC’s response to the 
Ukraine crisis is focusing on seven neighbouring countries plus Ukraine and looking to 
expand support with CVA to seven more countries where displaced people have increased 
the population.  
The opportunity therefore for the IFRC to have a global solution that could be activated 
simultaneously in the countries where disasters and crises have affected people is highly 
beneficial to demonstrate scale, speed and quality service using CVA. This will also help the 
IFRC reach its ambitious goal for scale. 
3. IFRC COVID-19 6-month operational update, August 2020.
4. IFRC COVID-19 12-month operational update, January 2021.
5. https://www.ifrc.org/document/world-disasters-report-2020

--- Page 8 ---
8     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
For the National Societies, a global solution could be an opportunity to help them gain 
more experience in dealing with FSPs, particularly when they have not yet conducted cash 
preparedness. In addition, having an alternative payment solution that could be used 
during an emergency would be helpful in cases where the current contract is no longer 
valid or if the services provided by existing FSPs are not feasible to use given the context 
of the emergency. Having an alternative solution may also be helpful in case the country 
faces market shocks or unexpected disruptions in FSPs such as sanctions, currency 
devaluation or liquidity issues.
In addition to addressing the procurement issue, the global payment solution could also 
shorten the time for money to be routed through the financial pipeline to reach 
affected people. Typically, funds flow from IFRC headquarters in Geneva to the regional 
office then to the country office or the National Society’s bank account to the local FSP. For 
example, an internal analysis in 2019 of the IFRC financial pipeline in one country in Asia 
Pacific showed that funds transfer could take about 17—21 days because of the time it 
takes for the intermediary banks to process and move the funds. The days vary based on 
the banks and the number of intermediaries. A global solution could help reduce the 
number of intermediaries (e.g. IFRC Geneva to the global FSP to the local FSP) and therefore 
the overall time to get money to the affected population.
The expectations are high if indeed a global payment solution is feasible to implement for 
the needs of the IFRC and its ambition to scale up CVA. It is also worth noting, however, 
that there are bottlenecks and challenges in implementing CVA that the global payment 
solution will not be able to address, and therefore there is a need to be realistic on what 
the solution will help address. For example, the flow of funding could be optimized but the 
process involved to request for funding, the internal approvals and the review process on 
the side of the FSP will not be addressed by the solution itself.
BOX 1: OPPORTUNITIES FOR A GLOBAL PAYMENT SOLUTION
For IFRC Secretariat:
	
¤
Ability to provide timely and scalable cash that 
could be deployed immediately in emergencies
	
¤
Be agile to respond to rising global and multi-
country impacting disasters and crises
	
¤
Complement cash preparedness activities 
which typically take time, and are carried on 
outside of emergency situations
For National Societies:
	
¤
Gain experience with using FSPs especially 
when they have not yet done this through cash 
preparedness activities or have no experience 
in using CVA before
	
¤
Have an alternative payment solution in cases 
where the contract with current FSP is no 
longer valid or the services of the FSP are not 
feasible for the context of the emergency
	
¤
Have an alternative in case of market shocks 
or unforeseen disruptions with current FSPs, 
including sanctions and currency devaluation

--- Page 9 ---
Defining a global payment solution   |   9
DEFINING A GLOBAL PAYMENT SOLUTION
A global payment solution in the context of this study was thought of as a service that 
would provide cash in different contexts and that could be activated in different locations 
when emergencies arise. The concept draws inspiration from the IFRC’s regional payment 
solution for the Americas region that used a financial provider to issue prepaid cards that 
could be shipped to an area affected by an emergency and topped up with cash value 
remotely. See Box 2 for more details about the Americas regional payment solution.
The key properties IFRC expects from a global payment solution include:
	
¤
Ability to be activated from global, regional or country level 
	
¤
Ability to offer different payment mechanisms (e.g. bank cards, mobile money, 
remittance, etc.) providing flexibility to address different contexts and programme needs
	
¤
Ability to scale in terms of volume of cash and number of people to assist
	
¤
Ability to address risks and challenges in providing cash to vulnerable populations
	
¤
Ability to increase accountability and transparency to donors, partners and affected 
populations
Indonesia 2016. The women in Rido Manah, Indonesia, received 
about 60 US dollars each using mobile money as part of a pilot 
project run in a partnership between Palang Merah Indonesia 
(Indonesian Red Cross), American Red Cross and Mastercard to 
distribute funds digitally to families via their mobile phones for  
the purchase of water and other items during the drought season.  
© American Red Cross

--- Page 10 ---
BOX 2: PREPAID CARDS IN THE AMERICAS REGION
In 2014, the IFRC established a regional framework agreement with a company that provided prepaid cards 
that could be shipped to emergency locations and distributed to affected people in the Americas region. The 
cards did not have monetary value when shipped. When they arrived in the country of operation, the cards 
were assigned to individuals and topped up remotely with monetary value (USD currency) using a web 
portal. The individuals then used an ATM to withdraw their cash assistance or purchased from shops and 
vendors that accepted Visa prepaid cards. It took nine months to do the initial procurement and establish a 
regional framework agreement. 
Between November 2019 and May 
2022, the prepaid cards have been 
used in 14 countries in the Americas 
region including a scale-up of cash 
assistance in the Bahamas. Over 
16,700 cards were activated and 
transferred over 13.6 million USD to 
affected people. The cards were used 
in 
response 
to 
the 
population 
movement in the Americas, floods, 
response to hurricanes Eta and Iota, 
response 
to 
hurricane 
Dorian 
(Bahamas), and response to the 
volcano eruption in St. Vincent.
The prepaid cards were seen as a 
quick way to distribute cash particularly 
when an agreement with a local 
financial 
service 
provider 
is 
not 
available or usable for the emergency 
context. For instance, in the Bahamas, 
the National Society had prior experience in using locally procured prepaid cards from a local bank. However, 
when Hurricane Dorian affected the country in September 2019, the contract with the FSP was not valid. 
There were also some questions on whether the FSP would be able to handle the scale in terms of volume 
of cash to distribute and number of people to assist. After the analysis and comparison between the IFRC’s 
regional payment solution and the local option, it was decided to use the IFRC’s payment solution, although 
the service costs were higher than the local option. Timeliness and scale were prioritized which allowed the 
IFRC and the Bahamas Red Cross Society to start distributing cash in less than one month (which coincided 
with when markets started functioning again) and scale up in subsequent months. Over 3,000 vulnerable 
households were assisted by February 2020 and about 11 million USD loaded in the cards6.
6. https://adore.ifrc.org/Download.aspx?FileId=307860 – IFRC The Bahamas Hurricane Dorian Emergency Appeal six months update, May 2020.
Grand Bahama, Bahamas 2019. Geniece was one of the first people to receive financial assistance 
from the Bahamas Red Cross Society using a prepaid card after the devastating impact of Hurricane 
Dorian. © American Red Cross
10     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance

--- Page 11 ---
Defining a global payment solution   |   11
During the consultations with other humanitarian actors, it seemed that not many have 
invested in a global payment solution. One agency mentioned they contracted a 
global remittance company, but it was not widely used in response; one reason being the 
geographical coverage of the provider was not sufficient in areas where most needs are. 
Many other organizations were focusing on local procurement of FSPs or relying on 
partners that have existing agreements with FSPs. 
The concept of a global payment solution was investigated by the IFRC back in 2015. In 
2016, the American Red Cross, which was supportive of exploring global payment solutions, 
partnered with Mastercard, a global payment company to pilot a new technology that 
“enables humanitarian organizations to deliver funds through different channels – 
payment cards, mobile money, bank accounts and cash-out agents – from anywhere in the 
world”7. It was however only tested with mobile money and was not used for international 
emergencies after the pilot. Some of the challenges faced earlier by the IFRC in pursuing a 
global payment solution were:
1.	 Difficulties in coming up with a set of requirements that are realistic for vendors to 
implement, given the many contexts and scenarios to plan for with a global solution. 
The scope becomes too broad, and services of financial companies might focus on 
some specific services only (e.g. mobile money for a certain geographical area or 
agents being available primarily in urban areas).
2.	 Financial products and services evolve quickly, and humanitarian actors may not be 
aware of what exists and is feasible to use for humanitarian cash assistance.
3.	 Too time consuming to procure and set up global framework agreements. The 
regional agreement for the Americas took nine months to complete the initial 
procurement. 
The needs, ambitions and commitments of the IFRC have changed since its first attempt 
at finding a global payment solution. At the same time, the nature of disasters and crises 
affecting multi-countries warrants new solutions. But the approach of the IFRC to find 
such a global payment solution will also need to change. Learning from the challenges 
faced before, the IFRC will need to better engage the private sector (FSPs, fintech) to 
discover available solutions, rely on their expertise to map options and risks of which 
humanitarian actors may not be aware, and build meaningful shared-value relationships 
to establish trust and focus on what is most important, which is to address the needs of 
affected people.
7. https://newsroom.mastercard.com/asia-pacific/press-releases/mastercard-and-palang-merah-indonesia-launch-mobile-disbursements-
program-for-humanitarian-aid/

--- Page 12 ---
12     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Eswatini 2020. A beneficiary in front of the 
MTN merchant where he will cash out his 
assistance received through mobile money. 
© Ville Palonen/Finnish Red Cross

--- Page 13 ---
Models for a global payment solution   |   13
MODELS FOR A GLOBAL PAYMENT SOLUTION
During the consultations, participants asked whether the IFRC envisions a single provider 
or FSP offering a global payment solution. The basic analysis done on the sample of 
financial institutions with multi-country coverage (see Annex 2) showed that there is a 
diverse set of offerings available in the market and traditional procurement based on a 
single list of requirements covering a very broad list of contexts is quite unrealistic. 
Therefore, it became clear that different models for implementation will be necessary. The 
following are three models that attempt to address the properties expected from a global 
payment solution:
1. Aggregator model
There are companies that are investing in direct contracting with local banks and different 
payment solutions and therefore aggregating means to distribute cash. They would 
receive the funds from their clients and distribute through their locally contracted FSPs on 
behalf of the clients. Examples are: Segovia (acquired by Crown Agents Bank) offering 
integrations with banks and mobile money providers, RedRose Ltd offering an e-voucher 
solution as well as direct integration with MoneyGram, some local banks, and mobile 
money providers, and MFS Africa providing mobile money solutions to over 35 countries 
in Africa.
Pros: 
	
¤
Having a company with pre-agreements helps save time in conducting several local 
procurements (including due diligence checks, negotiations on rates as well as terms 
and conditions) and therefore faster activation of services during emergencies.
	
¤
The risk of non-delivery by local FSPs is taken on by the aggregator. 
	
¤
One centralized place to do reconciliation and reporting.
	
¤
Aggregator may be able to help with training.
Cons: 
	
¤
Relying on one company risks a single point of failure that could impact many other 
programmes and initiatives utilizing that company.
	
¤
Detailed contract negotiation with a local FSP is not possible; will rely on the 
negotiated terms and conditions by the aggregator. For example, provisions around 
data protection might not be as robust, or there may be inability to adhere to 
privileges and immunities of an international organization.
	
¤
The aggregator may not be fully aware of how the local FSP will operate depending 
on conditions and contexts. For example, some remittance companies may allow 
different types of identities (e.g. driver’s licence, birth certificate, tax registration), 
and in other countries the remittance company might take only a specific type (e.g. 
international passport or national ID card).
	
¤
Following up on issues (e.g. person unable to withdraw cash), may take time as the 
aggregator will need to work with the local FSPs to investigate.

--- Page 14 ---
14     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
2. A suite of payment solutions 
This model envisions having different payment mechanisms available to be deployed, 
where the region and country operation teams can decide on the most appropriate 
solution(s) to use. Many National Societies tend to use payment mechanisms popular in 
their regions (e.g. mobile money services in Africa, prepaid cards in the Americas, 
remittance in Asia Pacific). But having more options for them would help increase flexibility 
particularly if other payment mechanisms would be best utilized in harder to reach areas.
Companies that offer such specialized payment mechanisms for the region or a cluster of 
countries, such as the prepaid card provider for the Americas, would be helpful to provide 
choice and flexibility. Although this model entails procurement of separate payment 
mechanisms, managing the requirements and tailoring them to what is expected of such 
payment mechanisms would be more realistic and attract service providers that do offer 
such services rather than spreading out too broadly.
Pros:
	
¤
Flexibility and choice depending on what will be the most appropriate payment 
mechanism for the emergency.
	
¤
IFRC negotiates terms and conditions directly with each provider.
	
¤
Competition created between companies offering similar payment solutions to help 
drive competitive pricing.
	
¤
Once agreements are in place they are available to be activated for different 
emergencies and save time in the long run.
Cons:
	
¤
Procurement of multiple FSPs could take a long time.
	
¤
More dedicated resources are needed for vendor management of multiple FSPs.
Bangladesh 2020 
© Ibrahim Mollik/IFRC

--- Page 15 ---
Models for a global payment solution   |   15
3. Partnerships with multinational companies
This model focuses on partnerships with global financial companies (or those with multi-
country reach) to leverage their expertise and their networks to find solutions. In contrast 
to the previous two models where procurement with service providers is necessary, this 
model focuses on strategic engagements, which could lead to commercial relationships 
and therefore procurement later. Examples of companies with global or multi-country 
reach include Visa, Mastercard, Western Union, MoneyGram, Vodacom and Airtel.
Because of the fast evolution of technology and financial solutions as well as regulations 
and laws, it is important to have diverse partners that can inform humanitarian 
organizations of trends, companies working on relevant products, challenges and risks 
with which humanitarian actors may not be familiar, and that also have access to an 
extended network to better understand what is available in the market. Through 
partnerships, the hope is to be able to entice the private sector to build more financial 
solutions that cater to humanitarian needs. 
Pros:
	
¤
Allows for open dialogue that is not constrained by the formal and traditional 
procurement process.
	
¤
Opportunity to pilot new solutions and learn about them before procurement and 
full implementation.
	
¤
Opportunity to engage and incentivize the private sector to build financial solutions 
that cater to humanitarian organizations.
Cons:
	
¤
Does not provide readily deployable solutions but could provide support for piloting 
new products and services.
	
¤
Commercial relationships will typically require a procurement process as a service 
contract is needed if vendors are to be paid for services.
	
¤
Identifying who to partner with and creating a meaningful basis for partnership could 
take time. Some private sector companies might be willing to engage but also have 
limited resources.

--- Page 16 ---
16     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Engagement with the private sector solution providers
The three models are not mutually exclusive. A solution for the IFRC and other humanitarian 
actors may involve a combination of the three models. The first step is to have better 
engagement with the private sector that is not constrained by the traditional procurement 
process and therefore looking at the third model on partnerships and conducting market 
dialogues8 would be helpful. For instance, the CashHub, which is a global CVA resource 
platform for the Red Cross Red Crescent Movement hosted by the British Red Cross, 
started a Private Sector Reference Group aimed at bringing together representatives from 
fintech, digital service providers and others to informally discuss the challenges faced by 
the Movement with CVA and how the private sector might help address some of these 
challenges. Such dialogues or engagements are meant to educate each other’s sector on 
how they work as well as their specific needs, constraints, incentives or motivations. 
Discussions should lead to insights on solutions and their feasibility to be deployed. 
Another reason for meaningful engagement is to help build trust. During the consultations 
with humanitarian actors and with private sector companies, it was observed that each 
party perceives different goals or outcomes: humanitarian action versus profit. Building a 
global solution that is deployed in the difficult contexts in which humanitarians work 
requires commitment and trust that is beyond contractual agreements as it means 
learning, adapting and solving problems along the way in a different way from the typical 
clients of private sector providers.
8. “A market dialogue can give you valuable information about possible solutions, market dynamics and tender specifications.” See. https://www.
innovasjonnorge.no/globalassets/0-innovasjonnorge.no/subsites/hipnorway/innovation-friendly-procurement-tools_02062020.pdf
Turkey 2021. A migrant at an ATM withdrawing money which she receives as part of a cash assistance programme in Turkey.  
© Turkish Red Crescent

--- Page 17 ---
Models for a global payment solution   |   17
One key informant commented about difficulties in convincing some financial service 
providers to offer solutions to humanitarian organizations, and therefore the procurement 
process resulted in less than adequate proposals. In this scenario, it was noted that the 
providers have never worked with humanitarian organizations before and no discussion 
about the opportunity of reaching a new market (or potential for financial inclusion) took 
place. Another key informant whose organization had framework agreements with multiple 
FSPs commented that they tend to use just one of the partners because they seemed to 
be more committed to the humanitarian cause than the other companies, adding that 
“their agents were willing to cross rivers and mountains with our volunteers to reach 
people in need”. 
CALP’s report on the Future of Financial Assistance: An Outlook to 2030 offers a good 
summary of the role of the private sector and why engagement is important, noting, 
“Private sector actors argue that failure to engage them earlier in the programme design 
process and treat them as strategic partners means that humanitarian actors miss 
opportunities to ensure that financial products and services are better tailored to crisis-
affected people”9.
9. https://www.calpnetwork.org/publication/the-future-of-financial-assistance/
Poland 2022. Mariia is one of the first 
Ukrainian refugees to receive cash relief 
using a prepaid card. Mariia left her 
hometown to seek safety in Poland.  
© Carina Wint/IFRC

--- Page 18 ---
18     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
CONSIDERATIONS FOR IMPLEMENTING  
A GLOBAL PAYMENT SOLUTION
Learning from the regional payment solution for the Americas and in discussion with key 
informants, the following are some of the key factors to consider when sourcing and 
implementing a global payment solution:
Costs 
Compared to locally procured and directly negotiated services, a global payment solution 
will be more expensive. The premium service costs might be justified since the provider 
takes on the risks for the performance, delivery and management of its local providers, in 
addition to the convenience of not having to go through multiple local procurements10. In 
the example of the use of the IFRC’s regional prepaid card mentioned in Box 2, the cost 
analysis showed that the local card previously used by the Bahamas Red Cross was 
considerably cheaper than the regional card. There were flat fees for ordering the plastic 
cards and there were variable fees for different transactions such as ATM balance inquiry, 
international ATM fees, point of sale fees, etc. Having the funds transferred in USD versus 
the local currencies could also make a big difference depending on the country. For 
remittance services, there could be foreign exchange rate fees controlled by the FSP. For 
mobile money, additional fees could be added to the standard transaction fees.
It is possible to negotiate the different costs, but it will be important to do some analysis 
on cost factors and model costing scenarios to understand the ranges that will be 
acceptable for the organization. One factor to negotiate is the potential for large volumes, 
particularly if National Societies are allowed to join the framework agreements for their 
own specific programme use in addition to IFRC’s programmes and operations.
Duration of use
Given the likely higher costs of global solutions than local solutions, it is important to 
consider the duration for which global solutions are used. Having the global solution used 
for emergencies where it is difficult to procure local solutions would ensure timely cash 
assistance is provided. It would, however, be ideal to have local solutions to transition to 
quickly, not only to save on the premium costs but also to ensure National Societies or 
local branches of the organization are able to rely on solutions that they themselves 
procure and negotiate, which is more sustainable. The use of global solutions could 
certainly help local actors learn more about and get experience with different financial 
solutions, which will be useful when they procure their own local solutions as well as have 
an alternative in case the local solutions are not feasible in certain contexts.
10. See the pros and cons for the different models for the global payment solution.

--- Page 19 ---
Considerations for implementing a global payment solution   |   19
Preference of end users
The aggregator and the suite of solutions models aim to provide flexibility for the 
humanitarian organization to deploy the most appropriate payment mechanism(s) 
available. Equally important is to ensure the solution option is appropriate, desired and 
preferred by the cash recipients. Providing options to affected people on how they would 
like to receive their cash assistance promotes respect and dignity just as much as how 
they are to use cash to address their needs. Certain payment mechanisms require 
sensitization and training for cash recipients. For example, for the population movement 
in 2016 in Greece, the IFRC and Hellenic Red Cross provided support to the migrants on 
how to use ATM cards as some of them were not familiar with their use11. Giving options, 
when possible, helps increase the quality of humanitarian service. 
Differences in local implementation
One assumption with global solutions is that once the solution is activated for one country, 
the implementation would be exactly the same in another country or location. Because of 
varying contexts in addition to different laws and regulations in different countries, it is 
expected that there will be variations on how services might be activated in different 
locations. For example, the “know your customer” (KYC) requirements might be different 
and therefore it is important to analyse which are the valid identity documents accepted. 
Another example is that certain banks or financial providers in-country might be blocked 
by the government.
The nuances of the local activation of services will also need to be analysed, for instance, 
geographical coverage of the provider, liquidity of the agents or financial institutions, 
delays in sending payment instructions, availability of local customer services, what types 
of reports are available and timeliness of reconciliation. Depending on how well the global 
provider has tested transactions with their local providers, it might be that they are 
learning about the nuances and issues at the same time as their clients. It is therefore 
recommended to conduct a test first with the local providers before planning to scale up. 
It is also necessary to be prepared to adjust each organization’s standard operating 
procedures (SOPs) if they are to be developed from a global perspective. Particularly when 
a suite of payment solutions is being provided, each payment mechanism will require its 
own specific SOPs (e.g. payment cards versus remittance). Having focal points that know 
the intricacies of the various solutions from activation to distribution, reconciliation and 
reporting will be important.
11. https://cash-hub.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2020/10/Key-Learning-and-Recommendations-North-Greece-CBA-IFRC-042017.pdf

--- Page 20 ---
20     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Integration with data management
Humanitarian organizations have been investing in data management solutions to support 
scale-up of their CVA interventions (e.g. IFRC’s use of RedRose, World Food Programme’s 
[WFP] SCOPE, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees’ [UNHCR] ProGres). 
Ensuring that these data management solutions can integrate with the global payment 
solution is essential to facilitate secure transactions, promote privacy and data protection, 
enable tracking and monitoring of payments (ideally in real-time), link transactions with 
data of recipients to help triangulate issues regarding cash disbursements, and permit 
reconciliation, audit and reporting.
Challenging contexts
Market, financial and general economic volatility could impact the financial institutions that 
are responsible for distributing humanitarian cash assistance. This study does not go into 
detail on impacts of such challenging contexts but did ask how a global payment solution 
might be helpful particularly in dealing with sanctions, devaluation of currencies and heavy 
restrictions on financial institutions.
Eswatini 2020. Eswatini Red Cross Society  
cash transfer operation.Beneficiary Alice Gina  
received her assistance through mobile money.  
Here, the MTN agent is processing her cash  
out request.
© Ville Palonen/Finnish Red Cross

--- Page 21 ---
Considerations for implementing a global payment solution   |   21
Sanctions is a broad and complex topic that applies to companies or individuals and differs 
due to situation or context. This study focused on sanctions against banks that could affect the 
management of payments for CVA. For example, donors from the USA or EU might restrict 
how funds are channelled to financial institutions that have been sanctioned by their 
governments. There are certain exemptions for humanitarian action to which specific licences 
or approval to use sanctioned companies could be obtained. But according to a global financial 
institution consulted for this study, the time it takes to get the necessary approvals might not 
be conducive for emergency situations, and there could be wider impacts to networks that 
could affect acceptability and availability of services and therefore such licence or approval 
might result in very limited activities and capacities. 
Heavily restricted financial institutions due to liquidity issues, disruption in infrastructure 
and national financial systems is another important context to analyse to discover whether 
global payment solutions might be helpful. Situations in Afghanistan after the Taliban took 
control in 2021, the economic crisis in Lebanon that started worsening in 2019, and the 
impacts of a long conflict in Yemen that weakened its banking sector and confidence in 
formal financial institutions12, have all shown difficulties in distributing cash aid due to 
such restrictions. A global payment solution typically relies on the availability of functioning 
financial institutions in the country and therefore could be difficult to deploy in these 
complex situations.
High inflation and devaluation of currencies could also impact the effectiveness of having 
a global payment solution. Funds channelled from an international FSP to a local FSP might 
be subject to highly volatile exchange rate fluctuations. The CALP Network produced some 
documentation on good practices and case studies in contexts of high inflation and 
depreciation13. There are several recommendations including the use of hard currency14 
that could be looked at with global payment solutions.
With these challenging contexts, some key informants have raised the possibility of having 
global providers work with local providers that might include informal payment systems 
such as “hawala”15, which allows for transfer of money without formal banking relationships. 
These informal payment solutions come with risks since they are typically not regulated 
by government and financial bodies, but in many cases, they are effective, efficient, 
and accepted by local communities. Where there is detachment from a formal 
banking relationship is further emphasized by blockchain16-based solutions such as 
cryptocurrencies17. Also currently unregulated, the emerging technology is being sought 
after to solve cross-border money transfer issues where there are significant challenges 
due to sanctions, restrictions in formal financial institutions such as banks, and currency 
devaluations. See Box 3 for more details and examples of how blockchain-based solutions 
have been used in humanitarian cash assistance.
These topics on challenging economic contexts are complex and warrant more research 
including how global payment solutions may be helpful in such contexts.
12. Impact of conflict on the financial sector in Yemen: implications for food security (ODI, December 2021) https://cdn.odi.org/media/
documents/Impact_of_conflict_on_the_financial_sector_in_Yemen_Jg6sNMp.pdf
13. https://www.calpnetwork.org/publication/good-practice-review-on-cash-assistance-in-contextsof-high-inflation-and-depreciation/
14. CALP – Hard currency refers to money issued by a nation seen as politically and economically stable. Hard currencies can sometimes be 
accepted as a form of payment for goods and services and even preferred over domestic currency. The typical example is US dollars (USD).
15. https://www.fatf-gafi.org/media/fatf/documents/reports/Role-of-hawala-and-similar-in-ml-tf.pdf
16. Blockchain technology: A blockchain is a decentralized distributed database or ledger that stores information electronically in digital 
format. A blockchain guarantees the fidelity and security of data and generates trust without the need for a trusted third party. Any data 
stored on blockchain is unable to be modified, making the technology trusted for transactions such as payments and for information on 
cybersecurity and healthcare. Read more at https://builtin.com/blockchain  
17. https://consensys.net/blockchain-use-cases/finance/

--- Page 22 ---
22     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
BOX 3: BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SOLUTIONS AND CRYPTOCURRENCIES
The interest of humanitarian actors to explore blockchain-based solutions and cryptocurrencies to deliver 
CVA has been increasing particularly for cross-border aid. The benefits sought include better traceability of 
donor funding, automated impact assessment, increased access to fund people in need, and increased 
efficiency in funds transfer18. CALP’s report on The Future of Financial Assistance indicated the opportunities 
of using blockchain and cryptocurrencies in two scenarios they foresee by 2030 to address interoperability 
of data for people moving across international borders, improve identity management and need to address 
KYC, anti-money laundering (AML) and combating the financing of terrorism (CFT) requirements, having a 
more resilient payment option for people on the move and when shocks affect markets, and for faster and 
cheaper remittance options19. There are concerns and limitations of such solutions, including weak 
regulations and volatility of monetary value, leading therefore to low trust and perception of high risks.
Nevertheless, humanitarian organizations are piloting and seeking evidence of such benefits and analysing 
the perceived risks. A few notable examples:
	
¤
Oxfam’s Project Unblocked Cash20 was launched in May 2019 and piloted an e-voucher system in 
Vanuatu where 200 participants received near-field communication (NFC21) cards linked to a digital 
wallet with DAI22 cryptocurrency tokens that have an established monetary value. The platform 
leveraged the public blockchain solution of Ethereum. The cards were used in participating stores 
and vendors cashed out the funds in local currency. Oxfam scaled their solution when Cyclone Harold 
and COVID-19 hit Vanuatu in 2020, reaching over 35,000 beneficiaries with two million USD in cash 
assistance23.
	
¤
In 2021, Hope for Haiti launched a pilot targeting women and children and providing them with 
assistance using e-vouchers for a nutrition programme. A digital wallet was provided to the 
participants who received stablecoin tokens managed on the Celo blockchain. Merchants had an 
app that read the wallets and tokens and cashed out using a mobile money provider. Realtime 
analytics were provided allowing the programme teams to monitor the programme and trace 
funds24. The process eliminated financial intermediaries, reducing operational costs due to cross-
border transactions. Hope for Haiti also allowed cryptocurrencies to be received to raise funds for 
emergencies such as the 7.1 magnitude earthquake in August 2021.
	
¤
In 2019, Mercy Corps conducted a pilot of a blockchain-based voucher system that used “Humanity 
First Token” for refugees from South Sudan that fled to Uganda. The tokens were pegged to Uganda 
Shillings. The refugees received a digital wallet that could be used within their stay in Uganda or in 
their country of origin if they chose to return. The tokens could be used with local vendors to receive 
food and solar panels, for instance. The vendors can then redeem the tokens received at Binance 
Uganda exchange25. Binance is a global cryptocurrency exchange.
	
¤
In August 2021, after the Taliban took control of Afghanistan, a humanitarian crisis ensued where 
borders were closed, costs increased significantly, cash and food supplies were reduced, currency 
plummeted, and many lost their jobs and needed essential services. Banks closed for a long period 
of time and money transfers were discontinued, making it very difficult to get access to cash. Code to 
Inspire, an NGO providing education to young Afghan women, started using cryptocurrency stablecoin 
BUSD, which they sent to students (value of 200 USD per month), which were exchanged for local 
currency at money exchanges. Due to the collapse of the financial system, there has been a rise in the 
use of cryptocurrencies in Afghanistan26.
18. https://www.coindesk.com/podcasts/coindesks-money-reimagined/the-complexities-of-blockchain-in-global-aid-efforts/
19. https://www.calpnetwork.org/publication/the-future-of-financial-assistance/
20. https://consensys.net/blockchain-use-cases/social-impact/project-unblocked-cash-case-study/
21. Near-field communication (NFC) is a set of short-range wireless technologies. NFC allows the sharing of small amounts of data between 
two Android devices, such as smartphones, for example. 
22. Dai is a cryptocurrency where the value is kept as close to one US dollar (1:1 ratio) as possible.
23. https://www.oxfam.org/en/unblocked-cash-project-using-blockchain-technology-revolutionize-humanitarian-aid
24. Hope for Haiti Chooses Celo and Emerging Impact as First Blockchain Partners to Deliver Digital Humanitarian Aid | by Celo Foundation | 
The Celo Blog | Medium
25. Binance Charity Joins Forces with Mercy Corps to Launch Impact Token to Aid the Displaced | Binance Blog
26. Afghans turn to cryptocurrencies amid US sanctions - BBC News

--- Page 23 ---
Considerations for implementing a global payment solution   |   23
Jordan 2021. Ahmad Theeb Abu Shefeh 
takes money from an ATM that he received 
through the Red Cross cash assistance 
programme in Amman, Jordan. The money 
is essential for Ahmad and his family to 
survive in Jordan.  
© Andrew McConnell/British Red Cross

--- Page 24 ---
24     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
CASE STUDIES
COVID-19 pandemic
The IFRC’s COVID-19 response operation was a global effort of individual domestic 
responses by its member National Societies. In January 2020, the IFRC launched the first 
global emergency appeal in response to the rise of infections due to the COVID-19 virus, 
which was eventually declared as a pandemic. In the first six months of the pandemic 
response, 60 National Societies worldwide have included CVA in their response plan 
and another 10 National Societies were considering including CVA. The appetite to use 
CVA as a response tool was very positive even for the National Societies that have never 
used it before due to the speed it takes to deliver cash, the choice and dignity it provides 
recipients, and the ability to minimize face-to-face interactions when delivering cash 
using digital means. It was clear that the National Societies that already have valid 
contracts with FSPs and experience with delivering cash assistance were able to 
implement their CVA interventions quickly. However, those that did not have FSPs and 
prior experience delivering CVA faced considerable challenges. The procurement of 
FSPs during an emergency was seen as one of the critical bottlenecks in CVA, and this 
issue was magnified during the COVID-19 response given the number of National 
Societies trying to implement CVA. The procurement process could take up to six 
months including due diligence and contract negotiations with FSPs.
The use of the regional prepaid cards in the Americas was helpful for National Societies 
that were able to use it for their COVID-19 response. The cards were easy to top up with 
monetary value remotely, reducing physical contact. 
In this scenario and in future pandemic responses, a global 
payment solution could be an option for National Societies 
that may not have their own local FSP contacts yet (or have 
expired or unusable agreements). It could at minimum be 
used for the immediate response ensuring cash is 
delivered to vulnerable families as quickly and as early as 
possible, while the local procurement process is 
conducted in parallel.
Bangladesh 2020. Abdul Rashid who lost his job following the 
COVID-19 lockdown was one of 1,200 families in Cox’s Bazar that 
received cash grants from the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society 
to help recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on 
their livelihoods. © Ibrahim Malik/IFRC

--- Page 25 ---
Ukraine and impacted countries crisis
Since February 2022, the conflict escalation in Ukraine has displaced millions of people to 
neighbouring countries. National Societies in Ukraine and the neighbouring countries, 
with the support of the IFRC, are assisting affected people with cash assistance for 
immediate basic needs. The rate of movement of people to find safe accommodation has 
been unpredictable, and people continue to move in the months since the beginning of 
the crisis. The IFRC is supporting Ukraine and seven neighbouring countries, many of 
which have not used cash assistance before and therefore do not have established 
contracts with local FSPs. The IFRC tried to engage a global financial company that provided 
prepaid cards across Europe, but unfortunately costs were too high and there was no time 
to engage meaningfully during the peak of the emergency. The IFRC then tried to extend 
the scope of the regional prepaid card solution used in the Americas region since a 
commercial relationship has already been established with the FSP. There were some 
limitations including geographical coverage in certain countries, but it allowed the prepaid 
cards to be deployed in at least two countries. Further challenges were faced because of 
the low limits of money that could be topped up in the cards and since it required a 
significant amount of effort to manage the prepaid cards manually, deliver and train 
recipients on how to use them, provide assistance to those who lost their cards or forgot 
their PIN codes,  deliver reports and undertake reconciliation. The IFRC already have a 
framework agreement with RedRose for data management, and RedRose just integrated 
with MoneyGram remittance services prior to the conflict. The MoneyGram service was 
available in all the countries being supported by the IFRC, although some specific areas did 
not have very good coverage. Since there were adequate MoneyGram agents in the 
priority areas for the operation, it enabled the IFRC and the National Societies to scale up.
Having two options for payment solutions that 
could be deployed to all countries covered by the 
operation provided flexibility especially since the 
prepaid cards did not require individuals to 
present official IDs (since some of them have lost 
or left their IDs or never had them in the first 
place) while the MoneyGram option required 
official identity documents. There were still some 
limitations faced with the MoneyGram option and 
varying issues in different countries. However, 
according to the IFRC’s three-month operational 
report, 646 households received prepaid cards in 
Poland and 1,685 households received cash using 
the MoneyGram service. In Romania, just one 
month 
after 
starting 
the 
cash 
assistance 
programme, over 26,000 individuals received 
cash assistance worth EUR 2.76 million using the 
MoneyGram service27.
In this scenario and where people are displaced and moving to different countries or 
areas, a global payment solution that allows for different payment mechanisms (e.g. 
prepaid cards, remittance, bank transfers, etc.) that are readily activated could help the 
country programme teams to design the most appropriate CVA intervention for the 
affected population where hopefully their preferences and choices on how to best receive 
cash assistance can also be taken into consideration.
27. IFRC Operations Update 3 for the Ukraine and impacted countries crisis. https://adore.ifrc.org/Download.aspx?FileId=546775
Romania 2022 © Angela Hill/IFRC
Case studies   |   25

--- Page 26 ---
Lebanon complex humanitarian crisis 
In August 2020, Beirut’s port was affected by double explosions on top of the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic and the deteriorating economy since 2019. The fluctuations in the 
local currency (the Lebanese pound [LBP] when it lost nearly 90 per cent of its value 
against the US dollar by May 202128) led to price increases of basic goods and hyperinflation. 
The banking systems were also affected where cash withdrawals were restricted to only 
the local currency LBP instead of having options to withdraw USD29; liquidity became an 
issue. Organizations that issued ATM cards found it difficult for recipients to use the cards 
in certain banks and had issues withdrawing their cash assistance.
In this situation where the financial markets are disrupted and the economy has collapsed, 
it is difficult for a global payment solution with standard payment offerings to provide an 
added value, unless it was able to disburse in USD or euros in country, but this could also 
create protection issues for those receiving such currencies with high value. In other 
countries facing serious economic crisis such as Afghanistan and Ukraine, the use of 
cryptocurrencies and blockchain-based financial solutions has been explored. It would 
therefore be important for a global payment solution to include highly innovative solution 
options that could provide additional flexibility when traditional banking and financial 
services are not available.
28. https://www.calpnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Lebanon-final.pdf
29. https://www.calpnetwork.org/wp-content/uploads/ninja-forms/2/DSP-CAMEALEON-Research-Report-Jan-2021.pdf
Lebanon 2020. Since September 2020, the Lebanese Red Cross shifted the focus of its response to direct financial assistance of 300 USD per month for seven months for 9,800 of 
the most vulnerable affected families. Their vulnerability was exacerbated by the massive explosion in the port area of Beirut, the economic crisis with the devaluation of the local 
currency, and the surge in the number of COVID-19 cases. © Lebanese Red Cross
26     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance

--- Page 27 ---
Recommendations   |   27
RECOMMENDATIONS
30
For the IFRC, the following are recommended:
Utilize the models presented in the report to analyse the best fit for the IFRC in 
developing a global payment solution based on the pros and cons. The opportunity 
to have a solution in place that could be activated during emergencies particularly at 
large scale with multi-country impacts will be beneficial, at minimum to address the 
short-term needs to distribute cash quickly or as an alternative if current providers 
are not able to deliver. 
There is a need for more engagement with the private sector as part of the 
procurement process. Given the example of the Innovation-friendly procurement 
process promoted by Innovation Norway, an open market dialogue could be a way 
towards this engagement, since it removes constraints in better understanding the 
solution offerings of providers before a traditional tender process is launched.
Link the global payment solution to cash preparedness. National Societies will be 
able to gain experience and learn by piloting with a global solution so they can 
determine on what would work for their local context. This will also test the global 
solution in that context and be an alternative solution in case the local option is 
unavailable or not feasible for a period of time.
30. At the time of the publication of this report, the IFRC has started testing how an aggregator model could work with RedRose who integrated 
with MoneyGram (global remittance), with mobile money providers in Africa, and directly with local banks. The IFRC also started strategic 
discussions with multinational/global payment institutions to see how partnerships could be used to gain access to experts in the finance 
sector, share insights on how the humanitarian sector works and challenges in providing cash to vulnerable people in very difficult situations 
and environments, and look for ways to co-develop solutions for humanitarian cash assistance globally. Furthermore, the IFRC is having 
informal discussions with fintech providers and will look to organize sessions and events for more systematic, meaningful engagements with 
the private sector.

--- Page 28 ---
28     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Afghanistan 2022 Afghan Red Crescent 
Society teams provide cash assistance to 
households that were affected by flash floods 
in Laghman province  
© Meer Abdullah Rasikh/IFRC Afghanistan

--- Page 29 ---
Conclusion   |   29
CONCLUSION
The trends indicate that there will be more global or multi-country impacted disasters and 
crises or emergencies. Getting more National Societies cash-ready and with established 
contracts with financial service providers will take time. In order to reach the flagship goal 
of having 50 per cent of humanitarian assistance using CVA, readily available payment 
mechanisms are essential. There is a big opportunity with a global payment solution to 
address the gaps, given the lengthy procurement processes or situation in which currently 
contracted financial service providers might not be able to provide cash at the onset of an 
emergency. A few options to model a global payment solution have been provided with 
different pros and cons. It is also important to acknowledge that these solutions are not 
meant to replace current approaches of procuring locally, but rather to complement when 
such local options are not available or feasible at the time of the emergency. It is also 
important to build more meaningful engagements with private sector partners, who have 
skills, expertise and competencies to grow and enhance the global payment solution(s), 
given the rapid evolution in the finance sector and the potential to entice them to develop 
more products and services that cater to the needs of humanitarian organizations.
A global payment solution addresses only specific areas of bottleneck in humanitarian 
cash assistance delivery, and procurement of local solutions is generally more cost-
effective and more sustainable. A global solution will not cover or be appropriate for all 
contexts, and will not cover all locations, so prioritization of risks to address contexts and 
geographical locations based on likelihood of repeat disasters will be important. The 
solution should complement and not be expected to replace local solutions.

--- Page 30 ---
30     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Chile 2022.  Jesús, better known as @jesuskitchen on social 
media, is Venezuelan and currently lives in the Bio-Bio region. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic and without stable work, he began 
posting Instagram messages about different dishes of his own 
creation in efforts to get sponsors to help him set up his own 
restaurant. He received cash assistance thanks to the the Chilean 
Red Cross and IFRC with their Livelihoods Cash Transfer 
Programme which supports entrepreneurs to prioritize and 
address the specific needs of their businesses.   
© Cruz Roja Chilena

--- Page 31 ---
Annexes   |   31
ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH
The following methodology was applied to achieve the objectives of the study:
	y
Mix of qualitative and 
quantitative research 
tools to address the 
study objectives. 
	y
Triangulate primary 
and secondary data 
to arrive at robust 
and conclusive 
results. 
	y
Desk review using 
secondary literature 
available on the 
humanitarian 
payments, fintech 
and global payment 
solutions with the 
perspective of 
cash and voucher 
assistance at a 
global level that has 
been sorted into an 
analytical framework.
	y
Desk review of 
IFRC, CALP and 
other similar 
actors’ programme 
literature 
implemented at a 
global level.
	y
Primary data to be 
collected through 
key informant 
interviews, focus 
group discussions 
and online surveys 
as required.
	y
Countries, payments 
and remittance 
companies and 
stakeholder 
identification at 
inception stage to 
identify and map 
their divergent 
interests and 
priorities.
	y
Inclusive and 
transparent 
approach to gain 
insights that are 
meaningful for the 
study objectives.
	y
Structured 
engagement with 
stakeholders through 
key informant 
interviews, focus 
group discussions 
and online survey as 
required to ensure 
that there are no 
information leakages.
	y
Data sources for the 
desk research are 
carefully scanned 
to only include 
credible and reliable 
publications that 
are relevant for the 
study.
	y
Sources for primary 
data collection will 
be carefully selected 
from the stakeholder 
map and as per need 
with consent and 
approval from IFRC.
	y
Process for sampling 
such as country and 
payment providers’ 
shortlisting will 
be discussed and 
validated with IFRC 
as required.
	y
Multiple review 
stages for deliverables 
with IFRC  and key 
stakeholders before 
finalization.
MIXED 
METHODOLOGY
DATA  
COLLECTION
CONSULTATIVE 
APPROACH
QUALITY 
ASSURANCE

--- Page 32 ---
32     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
ANNEX 2: SHORTLISTED COUNTRIES AND SAMPLE 
PAYMENT PROVIDERS
Countries were shortlisted based on the World Bank economic indicators, country economy groups, mobile 
money adoption, payment providers, and internet and mobile phone penetration. Fifteen countries were 
selected across various economy groups and payment providers to compare
	y World Bank list 
of countries by 
economy type used 
as the universe 
for the distillation 
process.
	y IFRC member 
countries selected
	y Source: World 
Bank Country and 
Lending Groups
	y IFRC
FILTER TO SELECT 
IFRC MEMBER 
COUNTRIES
LEVEL 1
LEVEL 2
LEVEL 3
LEVEL 4
CLASSIFICATION 
OF IFRC MEMBER 
COUNTRIES
FOR “EACH” 
ECONOMY GROUP, 
FILTER BY MOBILE 
MONEY ADOPTION, 
PAYMENTS, 
INTERNET AND 
MOBILE PHONE 
PENETRATION
QUALITATIVE  
INPUTS FROM  
THE CONSULTANT
	y Economy groups 
considered: High 
income, Low 
income, Lower 
middle income, 
Upper middle 
income
	y High income 
countries filtered 
out
	y Source: World 
Bank Country and 
Lending Groups
	y A draft list of 15 countries spread across various economy groups
	y 13 payment providers
	y Indicators for 
mobile money: 
GSMA Mobile 
Money Prevalence 
Index
	y Indicators 
for payment 
innovation: covered 
through desk 
country research 
	y Internet coverage 
and mobile phone 
penetration: 
covered through 
DataReportal reports
	y Source: Various, 
most notably: GSMA 
Mobile Prevalence 
Index, https://
datareportal.com
	y Screening questions 
(qualitative and 
quantitative) by 
consultant to 
ensure regional 
representation and 
alignment with IFRC 
interests
	y Indicators: desk 
research on 
payment providers 
based on scalability, 
speed, ease of 
use, flexibility, 
integration, 
accountability, 
data protection, 
localization, cost, 
cash preparedness 
and risk 
management 

--- Page 33 ---
Annexes   |   33
S No
Region
Economy 
type
Economy
Mobile 
money 
adoption31 
E-payment 
solutions32 
Internet 
coverage 
[2G-4G]33 
Mobile 
phone 
penetration34
1
Americas
Lower 
middle 
income
Bolivia
Low  
(0.39-0.20)
O
65%
99%
2
Americas
Upper 
middle 
income
Chile
ND
O
82.3%
132.1%
3
Americas
Middle 
income 
country 
Paraguay
High  
(0.79-0.60)
O
68.5%
100.3%
4
Americas
Upper 
middle 
income
Panama
ND
O
64.8%
107.9%
5
Americas
Lower 
income
Haiti
Medium 
(0.59-0.40)
O
37.3%
64.3%
6
Americas
Lower 
middle 
income 
country
Honduras
Medium 
(0.59-0.40)
D
38.2%
71.1%
7
Africa
Low  
income
Ethiopia
Low  
(0.39-0.20)
D
20.6%
38.5%
8
Africa
Lower 
middle 
income
Benin
Very high 
(0.80)
O
28.4%
83.6%
9
Africa
Mixed 
economic 
system
Congo
Very high 
(0.80)
D
32.1%
88.7%
10
Asia Pacific
Middle 
income 
Bangladesh
High  
(0.79-0.60)
O
28.8%
100.2%
11
Asia Pacific
Lower 
middle 
income
Nepal
Low  
(0.39-0.20)
O
36.7%
131.3%
12
Europe and 
Central Asia
Upper 
middle 
income
Azerbaijan
ND
D
81.1%
111.0%
13
Asia Pacific
Low  
income
Afghanistan
Very low  
(19)
D
22.0%
68.7%
14
Asia Pacific
Middle 
income 
country
Fiji
Medium 
(0.59-0.40)
D
70.5%
138.6%
15
Asia Pacific 
Lower to 
middle 
income
Papua New 
Guinea
Low  
(0.39-0.20)
D
15.2%
34.4%
Notes: Very high: > 0.80; High: 0.79-0.60; Medium: 0.59-0.40; Low: 0.39-0.20; Very low: <19; Payments innovation: 
“O” denotes countries that are offering e-payment solutions. “D” denotes countries where such services are under 
development; ND: No data
31. https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wpcontent/uploads/2021/09/MMPI_The_Mobile_Money_Prevalence_Index.pdf
32. World Bank - Payments Innovation: “O” denotes countries that are offering e-payment solutions. “D” denotes countries where such services 
are under development.
33. https://datareportal.com/
34. https://datareportal.com/

--- Page 34 ---
34     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
A select number of payment solution providers were shortlisted based on recommendations from 
consultation participants and desk research on service offerings that could be activated in different countries 
or areas. This list is not meant to be exhaustive and the attempt to rate them according to the criteria 
envisioned for the global payment solution was not meant to be conclusive or definitive. This analysis aimed 
at comparing aspects of the selected solutions based on key informant interviews and desk research. It is 
therefore important to engage actively with these providers and the private sector in general to gain better 
understanding of their capabilities.
S No
Economy
Payment provider
Scalability
Speed
Ease of use
Flexibility
Integration
Accountability
Data protection
Localization
Cost
Cash preparedness and 
operational readiness
Risk management
1
Global
Celo
G
G
G
L
G
E
L
L
ND
Y
G
2
Global
Vital Wave
G
G
E
G
G
E
G
G
ND
L
E
3
Global 
BPC 
Technologies
G
G
G
E
E
G
G
G
ND
L
E
4
Global
Red Rose
E
E
E
G
G
G
G
G
ND
Y
G
5
Sub-Saharan 
Africa
Leaf Global
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
ND
L
G
6
Sub-Saharan 
Africa
Eversend
E
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
ND
L
G
7
Europe
Papara
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
ND
L
G
8
Global
Zwipe
E
E
E
E
E
G
E
E
ND
Y
E
9
Sub-Saharan 
Africa, UK,  
and Myanmar
Squid
E
E
E
E
E
E
G
G
ND
Y
E
10
Sub-Saharan 
Africa
Grassroot 
Economics
G
G
G
E
G
G
G
G
ND
Y
E
11
Several 
Google Pay
E
E
E
E
E
G
G
E
ND
L
E
Notes: G means “Good”, L means “Low”, E means “Excellent”, “ND” means No data and Y means “Yes”

--- Page 35 ---
Annexes   |   35
Provider
Solution Type
Regions
Celo
Cryptocurrency
Global 
Vital Wave
Payments
Global
BPC Technologies
Payments
Global
RedRose
Humanitarian payments
Global 
World Line
Payments
Global 
Leaf Global
Fintech/payments
Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda
Eversend
Send/receive money, 
virtual debit cards and 
cryptocurrencies
Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, 
Rwanda, Tanzania and 
Uganda
Nagad
DFS
Bangladesh
Papara
Money transfer, payments
Turkey
Zwipe
Biometric cards
Global
Squid
Fintech, humanitarian 
payments, remittances
Kenya, with operational bases 
in Greater London, South 
West England, Nairobi, Abuja 
and Yangon
Grassroots Economics
Blockchain-based CVA 
system/community currency
Africa
Google Pay
Mobile wallet
Australia,  Canada, India, 
Japan, Russia, Singapore, 
Ukraine, United Kingdom and 
United States
Mastercard
Payment network
Global 
Crown Agents Banks 
(acquired  Segovia) 
Mobile wallet and bank 
integrations
Global
Avalanche (Ava Labs)
Blockchain
Global

--- Page 36 ---
36     |    IFRC  Global payment solutions for humanitarian cash assistance
Romania 2022.  Inna Ponoza accesses the money she received from 
the Romanian Red Cross through MoneyGram. She was the second 
person to receive assistance from this programme. An IFRC delegate 
travelled with her to ensure the process ran smoothly.The Romanian 
Red Cross continues to work to give crucial aid to people impacted by 
the ongoing conflict in Ukraine. At the same time as providing comfort, 
information and emergency kits, including food, water and hygiene kits, 
they are distributing financial assistance to help people who have lost 
so much.
© Angela Hill/IFRC

--- Page 37 ---

--- Page 38 ---

--- Page 39 ---
THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES  
OF THE INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS  
AND RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT
Humanity 
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement, born of a desire to bring assistance 
without discrimination to the wounded on the 
battlefield, endeavours, in its international and 
national capacity, to prevent and alleviate human 
suffering wherever it may be found. Its purpose is to 
protect life and health and to ensure respect for the 
human being. It promotes mutual understanding, 
friendship, cooperation and lasting peace amongst 
all peoples.
Impartiality 
It makes no discrimination as to nationality, race, 
religious beliefs, class or political opinions. It 
endeavours to relieve the suffering of individuals, 
being guided solely by their needs, and to give 
priority to the most urgent cases of distress.
Neutrality
In order to enjoy the confidence of all, the Movement 
may not take sides in hostilities or engage at any 
time in controversies of a political, racial, religious or 
ideological nature.
Independence
The Movement is independent. The National 
Societies, while auxiliaries in the humanitarian 
services of their governments and subject to the 
laws of their respective countries, must always 
maintain their autonomy so that they may be able at 
all times to act in accordance with the principles of 
the Movement.
Voluntary service 
It is a voluntary relief movement not prompted in 
any manner by desire for gain.
Unity 
There can be only one Red Cross or Red Crescent 
Society in any one country. It must be open to all. It 
must carry on its humanitarian work throughout its 
territory.
Universality 
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Movement, in which all societies have equal status 
and share equal responsibilities and duties in helping 
each other, is worldwide.

--- Page 40 ---
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies (IFRC) is the world’s largest humanitarian network, with 
192 National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and around 
14 million volunteers. Our volunteers are present in communities 
before, during and after a crisis or disaster. We work in the most 
hard to reach and complex settings in the world, saving lives and 
promoting human dignity. We support communities to become 
stronger and more resilient places where people can live safe and 
healthy lives, and have opportunities to thrive.
For more information on this IFRC publication, please contact:
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
twitter.com/ifrc 
| 
facebook.com/ifrc 
| 
instagram.com/ifrc 
| 
youtube.com/ifrc
