
--- Page 1 ---
Learning Review 
Blockchain Open Loop Cash 
Transfer Pilot Project
September 2018

--- Page 2 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 2
Introduction
In recent years, humanitarian work has become more 
complex with the growth of protracted crises, the 
impact of famine, climate change, urbanisation and 
the effect of mass population movements across all 
regions. There is increasing competition for limited 
resources from a growing number of actors and an 
ongoing struggle for humanitarian space. As needs 
outstrip resources, the sector needs to look at im­
proving efficiencies whilst strengthening the quality 
and impact of its work.  
Over the past decade, the use of cash transfer pro­
gramming (CTP)1  has increased. CTP is a disrupter: 
it is challenging the traditional humanitarian ap­
proach through the introduction of new actors, en­
couraging innovation and creating opportunities for 
financial inclusion.  It is defining a new role for tra­
ditional actors and increasing the focus on account­
ability to affected communities. Well-designed, ap­
propriate cash programmes bring greater choice and 
dignity to beneficiaries, while allowing humanitari­
an agencies to more efficiently and effectively meet 
the needs of affected populations. Just like any other 
method of aid delivery and programme implemen­
tation, CTP is constantly changing as the dynamics 
of disasters, donors, and the world changes. 
Cash Transfer Programming must be 
relentlessly upgraded with new innovations and 
approaches to ensure vulnerable communities 
receive the best possible support. 
Blockchain is one of the technological innovations 
being explored to make cash transfer systems more 
effective. Blockchain is a system of record that uses 
cryptography to secure data. The US Department 
of Commerce defines blockchain as “An immutable 
digital ledger system implemented in a distributed 
fashion (i.e. without a central repository) and usually 
without a central authority.” 2  
This definition highlights two key aspects of block­
chain: firstly, information entered on a blockchain 
is immutable and cannot be altered, (i.e. additional 
information can be added, but existing information 
cannot be deleted), and, secondly, blockchain is a 
distributed system that does not have a single point 
of failure. Copies of a blockchain are stored on all 
computers on the network, making the system ex­
tremely difficult to hack or destroy. 
Many blockchain use-cases are being explored in the 
humanitarian and development sectors. These in­
clude supply chain management, healthcare record 
systems, secure voting systems, peer-to-peer aid 
tracking and delivery platforms, secure land regis­
tries, and digital identification management3.
The International Federation of the Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) has been actively ex­
1 CTP refers to all programs where cash (or vouchers for goods or 
services) are directly provided to beneficiaries. In the context of 
humanitarian assistance, the term is used to refer to the provision 
of cash or vouchers given to individuals, household or community 
recipients; not to governments or other state actors. CaLP 
2https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/nistir/8202/
draft/documents/nistir8202-draft.pdf
3Blockchain and Economic Development: Hype vs. Reality
ploring these trends. In early 2018, the IFRC applied 
and won a global fintech and Islamic Finance com­
petition, which was organised by the Islamic De­
velopment Bank and IE Business School. The award 
will support the piloting of blockchain technology 
to increase the transparency and traceability of Is­
lamic social financing. In December 2017, the IFRC 
was awarded a grant by the Norwegian Red Cross 
and Innovation Norway to conduct the Blockchain 
Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project to explore how 
blockchain could add transparency and accounta­
bility to open-loop4 CTP, and to investigate how the 
technology could provide people with digital identi­
fication. 
Research suggests the potential for blockchain tech­
nology to undergird durable digital identification 
systems. This could provide an alternative identifi­
cation to beneficiaries without a National ID and al­
low them to avail aid, particularly cash-based assis­
tance. The pilot project investigated how digital IDs 
could be generated, maintained, and used in trans­
action tracking.
The objective of this report is to document the learn­
ings from this Pilot and inform a way-forward for the 
IFRC to continue exploring the risks and benefits of 
blockchain technology, as well as to share the find­
ings with other organisations that are considering 
the technology for similar purposes.

--- Page 3 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 3
4 World Economic Forum defines open-loop payment system as “A 
payments network that enables otherwise closed-loop payment 
systems to share endpoints. For example, a card-based payment 
system that allows the ATM cards from one bank to be used at 
another bank’s proprietary ATMs, or a remittance/money transfer 
system that enables funds deposited with one participating enti­
ty to be collected at another entity.” http://www.cashlearning.org/
downloads/weffiprincipleshumanitarianpayments.pdf
5 Pilot provided cash assistance of 3,000 KSH + 49 KSH for trans­
action fee per household
Project Overview
In May 2018, the IFRC in collaboration with the Kenya 
Red Cross Society (KRCS) implemented the pilot pro­
ject in Isiolo County, Kenya assisting over two-thou­
sand households affected by drought. Isiolo County 
forms one of Kenya’s twenty-three arid and semi-ar­
id lands where drought conditions are prevalent, 
producing high livestock mortality and, in turn, food 
and livelihood insecurity. 
KRCS has deep experience in CTP, having delivered 
cash-based assistance since 2011. KRCS has been 
one of the leading humanitarian actors in Kenya 
responding to the drought emergency that start­
ed in 2016.  KRCS is also highly innovative, using a 
breadth of technologies to meet the needs of their 
programmes, from e-vouchers solutions to direct 
mobile money transfers.
The figure above shows the steps taken by KRCS in 
their cash transfer programming.  
For the pilot project, the beneficiaries had already 
been registered from a previous cash distribution 
in Isiolo County. A subset of 2,000 households was 
drawn from the original group according to pre-es­
tablished criteria. Relevant personal information—
beneficiary name, phone number and national ID 
number—was uploaded to the data management 
system. To enable logging of transactions on the 
blockchain a set of public and private keys were gen­
erated for each beneficiary.
After finalizing the beneficiary list, a network of 
KRCS volunteers visited the communities to explain 
the Pilot Project objectives, process of receiving as­
sistance, and how to contact KRCS if there were 
questions or complaints. The volunteers also de­
livered an informed consent statement in the local 
language and asked beneficiaries for permission to 
use their personal information to satisfy financial 
regulations to disburse cash. Consent was captured 
using mobile phones and recorded on the data man­
agement system.
A distribution plan was created that grouped ben­
eficiaries by geographical area and included the 
amount they would receive5. The workflow to ap­
prove payments to beneficiaries involved a mech­
anism to ensure segregation of duties between the 
fund requester and the finance manager approving 
the disbursement.  With the finance manager’s fi­
nal approval, cash was disbursed to beneficiaries 
through Safaricom M-Pesa, a mobile money transfer 
service with an extensive network in Kenya. Bene­
ficiaries were familiar with the system and had re­
ceived cash assistance before using their M-Pesa ac­
counts.
Once Safaricom received the payment request and 
executed cash disbursement to the mobile wallets of 
beneficiaries, a record of the transaction was record­
ed on the data management platform and the block­
chain. Given the blockchain’s immutable nature, this 
Figure 1: High-level process of Kenya Red Cross’ cash transfer programming

--- Page 4 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 4
technology provided an additional record and level 
of assurance that data in the data management and 
M-Pesa databases had not been tampered with. 
Following the disbursement, nearly all beneficiar­
ies immediately redeemed and spent their cash 
assistance. Within days of disbursement most had 
bought foodstuffs and medicine, repaid debts, and 
paid forward education fees addressing their specif­
ic basic needs, according to a survey done after the 
cash distribution.
The Solution
For the pilot project, KRCS pioneered a contextual­
ized solution designed to promote timely delivery 
of aid while strengthening accountability to benefi­
ciaries and donors. Several partners came together 
to combine different capacities into an end-to-end 
system: Red Rose implemented a data management 
system, which was integrated via an electronic funds 
transfer mechanism to Safaricom’s M-Pesa mobile 
money network. In tandem, the data management 
system was also linked to a private blockchain built 
on open source technology to record transactions in 
an immutable manner. 
Safaricom M-Pesa
A key factor underlying the pilot project’s success 
was the widespread availability of mobile money 
networks in Kenya. Formed in 1997 as a subsidiary of 
Telkom Kenya, Safaricom Public Limited Company is 
the leading provider of mobile telephony in-country 
offering the M-Pesa mobile money service.6  
KRCS has been using M-Pesa as its default delivery 
mechanism to deliver cash transfers to beneficiaries 
and to disburse staff per diems and volunteer allow­
ances.  However, the process for disbursement was 
cumbersome with manual initiation and reconcilia­
tion done via the exchange of spreadsheets. For the 
pilot project the system was fully automated using 
an Application Programming Interface (API) provided 
by M-Pesa that allows companies to connect through 
3rd party applications to initiate cash transfers. 
Craft Silicon
Craft Silicon is a financial solutions software com­
pany based in Kenya. The company developed an 
Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) system for KRCS that 
directly integrates with M-Pesa and the KRCS inter­
nal financial system.  The pilot project used the EFT 
to automate the disbursement by M-Pesa through 
the Red Rose data management platform, making 
the one-click approval of distribution possible.  In­
stead of having a list of beneficiaries sent manually 
to M-Pesa, the EFT is used to request for immediate 
disbursement to individual beneficiaries for each 
call via the API provided.
Red Rose
Red Rose offers data management and delivery solu­
tions for cash and in-kind assistance provided by 
humanitarian organizations. For the pilot project, 
Red Rose implemented an integration between their 
data management platform and the mobile money 
provider M-Pesa through the EFT. This allowed data 
to be managed from a centralized online portal, 
which facilitated beneficiary management, record­
ing of consent, distribution planning, approval pro­
cess for cash disbursement, tracking of assistance 
and reconciliation, data visualization and post-dis­
tribution monitoring. 
6 M-PESA has two competitors, Airtel and Telkom. Since April 
2018, Airtel and Safaricom subscribers have been able to transfer 
and receive money between networks at no extra charge, making 
most mobile money systems in Kenya interoperable (Safaricom 
and Airtel represent a combined 86.5% market share).
Figure 2 shows the basic system architecture and the interaction among the 
integrated systems used in the Pilot

--- Page 5 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 5
Three features of the Red Rose data management 
solution were essential to the Pilot’s success: 
• First, the data collection tool works offline. Electric 
power in Isiolo County was limited, with frequent 
outages. Internet connection was only available 
through Safaricom hotspots, which were cumber­
some and slow. Being able to collect data offline and 
upload it later when connectivity was available was 
a critical feature.
• Second, the data solution integrates with financial 
service providers and other third parties through an 
application programming interface (API) allowing 
communications between different platforms. This 
feature allowed KRCS to automate the distribution 
and reconciliation with M-Pesa.
• Third, the platform provided audit logs to document 
decisions and approvals, segregated duties between 
the requester and the approver of funds and provid­
ed an easy way to see who received what, allowing 
the tracking of funds down to beneficiary level.
Having a robust data management solution allowed 
KRCS to respond to beneficiaries on the ground more 
quickly. The status of payments could be provided, 
missing or erroneous information corrected, con­
sent statements recorded, etc. Queries that had pre­
viously required days to respond to were answered 
in minutes due to the availability of data and easy 
access to it.  
Multichain Blockchain
Launched in 2014 by Coin Sciences, Multichain Pri­
vate Blockchain enables organizations to build their 
own chains using an off-the-shelf platform. Multi­
chain allows organizations to build public and pri­
vate chains, determine the target time for blocks, 
permission users, control block size, monitor meta­
data, and write chaincode. 
With the support of Red Rose, a blockchain was im­
plemented using Multichain’s off-the-shelf solution, 
making use of its native algorithm to secure trans­
action data with cryptography and produce an im­
mutable digital ledger. Four nodes were connected 
to this blockchain allowing IFRC, KRCS, and Red Rose 
to view transactions. 
The blockchain recorded cash disbursements from 
the data management system, providing an addi­
tional layer of assurance that transactions were ac­
counted for. Records were viewed via a custom-built 
interface, which could then be compared to the 
built-in audit logs available from the data manage­
ment platform.
Figure 3 below shows an example of the cash dis­
bursement transactions recorded in the blockchain 
and Figure 4 provides a view of a transaction.  Very 
limited information and no personal information7 
was recorded on the blockchain during the Pilot to 
ensure that data was protected while the risks and 
benefits of the technology were being explored.
7 See section on Challenges related to Data Privacy
Figure 3: Snapshot of transactions recorded in the blockchain

--- Page 6 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 6
Learning and outstanding questions
The project generated a significant amount of learn­
ing, leading to priorities for research moving for­
ward:
Technological synergies: For a federated organiza­
tion like the IFRC whose members utilise a variety 
of platforms for data collection and management, 
the modular approach used to develop the solution 
architecture provides flexibility to consider different 
applications to fulfil the required capabilities. The 
solution architecture also allowed to demonstrate 
that blockchain solutions can be implemented in 
lighter and less complicated manner, depending on 
the use-case and required capabilities. 
Question: How could the architecture could be 
expanded to allow third parties (e.g. financial service 
providers) to record transactions directly on the 
blockchain? 
Question: How could a public blockchain be 
incorporated and add value to the system? 
Auditability: Blockchain technology provided an 
additional layer of security and integrity to data from 
CTP. Data is recorded, timestamped, and available 
for analysis and audit.  Its immutable property helps 
triangulate discrepancies that may occur within an 
ecosystem of applications and therefore strengthen 
confidence in the programme. It offers auditors 
an independent way of verifying a compiled list of 
transactions against the records produced by the 
individual systems such as Red Rose or M-Pesa, 
keeping each of the systems honest and increasing 
confidence in the programme. Any discrepancies 
with the data could help flag an investigation early 
on. However, the ability to query data in the current 
solution was limited to a simple UI and command 
line interfaces.
In fact, the side effect of having a blockchain makes 
it harder to simply request the service provider to 
change the data. For example, when a disbursement 
is requested by mistake, it’s easy to call M-Pesa to 
revert the transaction. But because of the integration 
with the data management platform and blockchain, 
the process for this change needs to be orchestrated 
so a record to update the data is reflected on the 
blockchain in addition to all the interacting systems. 
This ensures the auditor has a full view of the 
transactions, including the original disbursement 
request and a separate record to correct that request.
Question: What are the processes, tools, and skillsets 
needed to audit data on a blockchain?
Digital Identity: Due to time-constraints, only basic 
elements of digital identity were tested: each bene­
ficiary profile established in the Red Rose data man­
agement platform was assigned a unique Red Rose 
beneficiary ID; on the blockchain, private and public 
keys were generated based on the Red Rose bene­
ficiary ID; transactions were written on the block­
chain using the public key corresponding to each 
beneficiary. 
For the Pilot the same vendor Red Rose was managing 
the beneficiaries’ personally identifiable information 
(PII), the blockchain infrastructure, and generation 
of digital IDs. The generation and management of 
the digital IDs would be better served if decoupled 
and managed as a separate capability that could be 
controlled by another system that would allow for 
cross-platform use.  
There’s a need to explore with third parties (such 
Figure 4: Snapshot of a cash disbursement transactions to a beneficiary re­
corded in the blockchain

--- Page 7 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 7
as Safaricom) the use of digital IDs generated by 
humanitarian organisations as an alternative to 
government IDs. Currently, national laws in Kenya 
require Safaricom to collect government issued ID to 
provide a mobile phone number and to register for 
M-Pesa accounts.  
Furthermore, there is also a need to allow beneficiaries 
to manage and maintain their own personal 
information. The concept of “self-sovereign” digital 
identities is being explored by technologists to enable 
ownership of personal information by beneficiaries 
instead of by humanitarian organizations and third-
party providers. Rather than having humanitarian 
organizations and third-party providers repeatedly 
collect beneficiary personal information, a self-
sovereign approach would empower beneficiaries 
to decide which relevant information to share with 
each service provider.
Question: Could a digital identity based on a self-
sovereign approach provide greater data security, while 
allowing beneficiaries to control and manage their own 
personal information? 
Question: To what extent would third parties (such 
as Safaricom) be willing to use digital ID’s generated 
by humanitarian organizations such as Red Cross Red 
Crescent Movement as an alternative to government 
IDs?  
Question: Would the use of digital ID’s allow 
beneficiaries without official government ID’s to establish 
a history of interactions with different organisations, 
thereby increasing their ability to access a wider set of 
social and financial services? 
Beneficiary Consent: The pilot project raised im­
portant questions surrounding consent and data 
privacy. For beneficiaries, the consent process was 
uncontroversial. During a survey, four respondents 
expressed concern over the Pilot’s use of their per­
sonal information, but they still opted to give their 
consent. In interviews beneficiaries explained that 
they trusted KRCS and that this trust extended to its 
partners. However, had beneficiaries not consented 
they would have not received assistance.
The Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian 
Action8 published by the Brussels Privacy Hub and 
the ICRC in 2017 identifies several circumstances 
that can obviate the need to attain consent 
from beneficiaries. These include the physical 
endangerment and vulnerability of a data subject, 
the inability of a Humanitarian Organization to 
collect consent due to security in the areas of 
operation, the gross vulnerability of a data subject 
resulting in their inability to provide true consent, 
and the presence of technologies characterized by 
complex architecture and multiple parties to the 
point that the beneficiaries are not in the position to 
understand the benefits and risks of what they are 
consenting to.
8https://www.icrc.org/en/publication/
handbook-data-protection-humanitarian-action
In the case of the pilot project, Blockchain technology 
is a complex data structure involving multiple 
stakeholders. It is difficult to understand, even for 
information technology professionals. It remains 
unclear how informed consent can be obtained from 
beneficiaries for projects involving complex data 
structures like blockchain. Furthermore, as the ICRC 
notes, gross vulnerability can also diminish the need 
for a full consent process (ICRC 2017). Beneficiaries 
of the pilot project were under duress and vulnerable 
to insecurity due to drought conditions. If they did 
not give their consent, they would not have received 
assistance. 
It must be noted that the process of obtaining consent 
for this Pilot was not only meant to record explicit 
beneficiary consent for personal data processing, 
but it was also used to ensure beneficiaries received 
communications on programme goals and objectives, 
how they would receive their cash assistance, and 
feedback and complaint mechanisms - this in and of 
itself has merit and is good programming. 
In the future, however, IFRC will need to build a robust 
protocol on the legal bases—which includes informed 
consent—for obtaining and using beneficiary data 
involving complex data architectures and contexts. 

--- Page 8 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 8
Providing information on how personal data will be 
used is also a requirement regardless of which legal 
basis is used.
Data Privacy: The European Union General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR), which entered into 
effect on 25 May 2018, is reshaping international 
standards of data protection. Its release has 
prompted Humanitarian Organizations to reconsider 
and strengthen data protection practices. As an 
International Humanitarian Organization, the IFRC 
is not subject to GDPR requirements, however, it 
seeks to align its data protection practices with those 
of GDPR—which represent the gold standard—to 
demonstrate commitment in taking data protection 
seriously.  Additionally, in working with National 
Societies such as KRCS, adherence to local laws 
related to data privacy is always observed.
Additionally, IFRC made extensive use of the 
Handbook on Data Protection in Humanitarian 
Action to guide data privacy protocols. An industry 
standard, the Handbook outlines data protection 
practices in the Humanitarian Sector and advances 
five principles of data protection:
1. Limitation and Further Processing: data recording 
should be clearly established at the outset of 
programs and confined to its purpose.
2. Legal bases for Personal Data Processing: analytics 
should only be performed on data if relevant to the 
program’s purpose. If not, a new legal basis must be 
found.
3. Fair and lawful processing: data recording should 
be fair and non-discriminatory.
4. Data minimization: data recorded should be 
minimal.
5.Data security: data recorded should be secure, up 
to date, and accurate.
For the pilot, the beneficiary information collected 
included name, national ID number, and mobile 
phone number. This was collected in accordance with 
the Kenya minimal requirements for mobile money 
transfers and the principle of data minimization. No 
other data was collected, and Safaricom conducted 
data verification prior to processing mobile transfers 
to ensure accuracy and validity of accounts.
Since GDPR gives the right to data subject to be 
forgotten (i.e. they can request that their personal 
data be modified or deleted), it’s unclear how 
this can be done with a technology that stores 
“unalterable” data. There are discussions on whether 
the pseudonymized IDs stored in the blockchain 
to refer to beneficiaries are considered personal 
information. The pilot project used a permission-
based private blockchain to keep full control of the 
security of data.  
Question: To what extent are GDPR and Blockchain 
technology compatible?
Intellectual Property: Collaboration with private sec­
tor partners was fundamentally important to the pi­
lot project’s success. Initially, the IFRC attempted to 
partner with a set of private sector companies with 
specific technology and know-how under a pro bono 
arrangement; however, negotiations around intellec­
tual property (IP) were time consuming and it was 
not possible to reach agreement within the project’s 
six-month timeframe. Ultimately, the IFRC opted to 
work with Red Rose, with which it had already se­
cured a contractual agreement that included previ­
ously negotiated clauses on intellectual property.
Partnership discussions highlighted that the IFRC 
had limited experience negotiating intellectual prop­
erty for technology-related partnerships. What con­
stitutes intellectual property depends on the van­
tage point of each organisation and can range from 
a restrictive definition – e.g. patentable assets such 
as software code – to a much broader definition that 
encompasses organizational know-how, processes, 
and business models. 
When IP is being developed that could have future 
commercial value, agreeing on what IP is being 
contributed and created becomes increasingly 
important. While the private sector is focused on 
maximizing value for its shareholders, non-profit 
organizations are driven by humanitarian principles 
and seek partnerships that further their ability to 
address the needs of vulnerable people. 
Question: To what extent are the public and private 
sector’s approaches to intellectual property compatible 
given the two sectors differing motives for partnering?
Wrapping Up

--- Page 9 ---
Learning Review Blockchain Open Loop Cash Transfer Pilot Project
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
p. 9
As the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement fulfils 
its Grand Bargain commitment to scale up cash 
transfer programming, better ways of implementing 
and 
supporting 
their 
cash 
programmes 
are 
necessary.  Innovative technologies offer ways to 
address specific needs for CTP.
Blockchain technology offers a way to improve 
transparency 
and 
accountability 
through 
its 
unalterable distributed ledger.  Coupled with data 
management 
and 
integration 
with 
open-loop 
payments such as mobile money, this solution 
enables more efficient, timely disbursement of 
cash at scale, while ensuring further controls and 
improved quality of service to beneficiaries.
This pilot project is the IFRC and KRCS’ first step 
towards implementing such a solution. Due to 
the short timeline, the focus was primarily on 
understanding blockchain’s potential for increasing 
transparency and accountability of CTP.  There 
are more opportunities to explore blockchain 
technology for cash-assistance including the use of 
smart contracts to secure forecast-based financing 
arrangements, the deployment of durable, self-
sovereign digital identifications, tracking of peer-
to-peer donations and payments, and the use of 
cryptocurrencies. 
Just as cash has been a positive disrupter for 
humanitarian assistance, blockchain also shows 
disruptive potential, provided its development is 
considered as part of a broader vision supporting 
CTP.
