
--- Page 1 ---
UnBlocked Cash: 
piloting accelerated 
cash transfer delivery 
in vanuatu 
research report 
october 2019

--- Page 2 ---
Author: Björn Rust
Project Lead: Sandra Uwantege Hart, Pacific Cash and Livelihoods Lead, Oxfam in Vanuatu
Information and Data Management Support Specialist: Vivian Fischer, Oxfam in Vanuatu
Designer: Tahnee Le Pine/Tootsie&Co 
Cover image: Pango, Vanuatu: Jamison Kaltabang, a recipient with a disability, is registered and given a payment card by Tevita 
Gideon, Oxfam staff during the Oxfam UnBlocked Cash Blockhain Pilot. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
Images: Keith Parsons, Oxfam Australia
Publication: Oxfam Australia, October 2019. Oxfam Australia | 132 Leicester Street, Carlton Victoria 3053 Australia 
Tel  +61 3 9289 9444 | Fax +61 3 9347 1983 | enquire@oxfam.org.au | www.oxfam.org.au
Acknowledgements: This report would not have been possible without the support of expert staff from Oxfam in Vanuatu and Oxfam 
Australia. The author especially thanks the Vanuatu cash and voucher assistance staff: Kalua salerua, Margaret Daniels, Tevita 
Gideon, Harry Nauko, Catharine Patunvanu, Dano Naryle, and Ester Samson.
In Australia, the author acknowledges the support of the OxLabs team members past and present, especially Elsa Carnaby, Kate 
Carter, David Gunn, and Josh Hallwright. These people were pivotal to the project’s inception. Special thanks also goes to Ellen 
Lu, OxLabs intern-the cost analysis in this report would not have been possible without your baseline analysis. The author also 
acknowledges additional input from the UnBlocked Cash research advisory group: Chris Elsden, Ellie Rennie, and Ludwig Trotter.
This report also draws on the work of Sempo and Consensys, which were Oxfam’s technical partners during the UnBlocked Cash pilot. 
Special thanks to Nick Williams and Melanie Hardman of Sempo. Oxfam would also like to acknowledge the time and support of the 
Government of Vanuatu in Shefa Province.
About this report: The UnBlocked Cash pilot is one in a series of Oxfam-initiated examinations of cash and voucher assistance in 
Vanuatu. This pilot builds on the Pacific Cash Preparedness Partnership, which aims to increase awareness, capacity, and expertise 
in cash and voucher assistance in the Pacific. The UnBlocked Cash pilot has been funded by the Australian Department of Foreign 
Affairs and Trade (DFAT) through the Australian NGO Cooperation Program (ANCP).
Disclaimer: This document references humanitarian preparedness activities implemented with financial assistance from the Australian 
Government through the Australian Aid program. The views expressed herein are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of Oxfam Australia or other partners, or of the Australian Government Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 
Oxfam encourages readers to comment on this report so that we can improve future research, design, and implementation of our 
cash and voucher assistance.
Please contact: 
Sandra Hart — sandrah@oxfam.org.au
Elsa Carnaby — elsac@oxfam.org.au
Josh Hallwright — joshh@oxfam.org.au
Statement of copyright: Oxfam gives permission for text excerpts from this report to be reproduced provided 
that the source is properly and clearly acknowledged; with the exception of reproduction of photographs of 
project participants, where specific permission must be sought.

--- Page 3 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    1
CONTENTS
Contents	
1
Acronyms	
3
1. Executive summary	
4
2. Introduction	
6
3. Background & context	
7
3.1. Unblocked cash partners	
8
3.1.1. Sempo	
8
3.1.2. Consensys	
9
3.2. Guiding frameworks	
9
3.3. Country context	
9
3.3.1. Pango	
10
3.3.2. Mele Maat	
11
3.4. Cash and voucher assistance	
12
3.5. Distributed ledger technologies	
12
3.5.1. Transparency	
13
3.5.2. Immutability	
13
3.5.3. Disintermediation	
13
3.5.4. Degree of participation	
13
3.5.5. The importance of trust	
14
3.6. Ethereum	
14
3.7. Stablecoins and Dai	
15
3.8. Near-field communication	
15
4. Dlt-based cash transfers in vanuatu	
19
5. Approach and methods	
20
5.1. Expected research outcomes	
20
5.2. Research participants	
21
5.2.1. Vendors	
21
5.2.2. Recipients	
22
5.3. Community engagement	
23
6. Stories	
25
6.1. Complex funds flow	
25
6.2. Hub-and-spoke funds flow	
26
6.3. How value is spent	
28
6.3.1. How value was not spent	
31
6.3.2. Transaction details	
31
6.4. Responding in real-time	
31
6.4.1. Outcomes of transparency	
31
6.4.2. Responsiveness	
31
6.4.3. Efficiency	
32
6.5. Competing with existing technologies and actors	
32
6.6. Hardware delays & failures	
32

--- Page 4 ---
2    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
6.7. DLT-based CVA durability in an urban context of Vanuatu	
33
6.8. The indispensable expert	
33
7. Analysis of the data informed by the stories	
35
7.1. Time	
35
7.1.1. Baseline time	
35
7.1.2. Response time	
35
7.1.3. Onboarding time	
35
7.2. Cost	
37
7.2.1. Baseline costs	
37
7.2.2. Sempo costs	
38
7.2.3. Total direct cost estimation	
38
7.3. Transparency	
39
7.3.1. Platform transparency	
39
7.4. Security	
40
7.4.1. Personal security	
40
7.4.2. Cyber security	
40
7.5. User experience	
41
7.5.1. User interface	
41
7.5.2. Integrations	
43
8. Recommendations	
44
8.1. Consider the location in project planning	
44
8.2. Consult communities more broadly	
44
8.2.1 Consult at-risk urban communities	
44
8.3. Uniquely identifiable cards	
44
8.4. More super vendors for post-disaster scenarios	
44
8.4.1. Alternatives to the super vendor	
46
8.5. Cashing out via digital exchange	
46
8.6. The use of Stablecoins	
46
8.7. App improvements	
47
8.7.1 Super vendor compatible app	
47
8.7.2 Donor compatible app	
47
8.8. Digital wallets	
47
8.8.1. Governance of digital wallets in a corporate environment	
47
8.8.2. Digital wallets in developing contexts	
47
8.9. Scaling-up	
49
8.9.1. Adding additional actors	
49
8.10. Lifetime research and development costs	
49
8.10.1. Staff training and operational considerations	
49
8.10.2. Clarify business models	
49
8.11. Addressing research limitations	
50
8.11.1. Onsite monitoring disconnected from PDM	
50
8.11.2. More comprehensive baseline studies	
50
8.12. Addressing risks	
50
8.12.1 Single point of failure	
50
8.12.2. Privacy breach due to real-time monitoring?	
50
9. References	
52

--- Page 5 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    3
Acronyms
AML	
Anti-money Laundering
ANCP 	
Australian NGO Cooperation Program
API 	
Application Programming Interface
AUD 	
Australian Dollar
AWS 	
Amazon Web Services
BSP 	
Bank South Pacific
BTC	
Bitcoin
CaLP 	
Cash Learning Partnership
CCT 	
Conditional Cash Transfer
CCV 	
Crypto Collateralised Voucher
CTF 	
Counter-Terrorism Financing
CTP 	
Cash Transfer Programme/Cash Transfer Programming
CVA	
Cash and Voucher Assistance
DFAT	
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DLT	
Distributed Ledger Technology
DLTs 	
Distributed Ledger Technologies
DRR 	
Disaster Risk Reduction
ETC 	
Emergency Telecommunications Cluster
FGD 	
Focus Group Discussion
FSP 	
Financial Service Provider
IC	
Integrated Circuit
ICT 	
Information and Communications Technology
ID 	
Identification
IIT 	
Intra-institutional Transfers
KII 	
Key Informant Interviews
KYC 	
Know Your Customer
MoU 	
Memorandum of Understanding
NFC 	
Near-field Communication
NGO	
Non-government Organisation
OAU 	
Oxfam Australia
ODI 	
Overseas Development Institute
OiV 	
Oxfam in Vanuatu
P2P	
Peer-to-peer
PDM	
Post-distribution Monitoring
PIN 	
Personal Identification Number
PoS	
Proof-of-stake
PoW	
Proof-of-work
QR 	
Quick Response
RFP	
Request for Proposal
SCP 	
Supply Chain Performance
TVL 	
Telecom Vanuatu Limited
UCT 	
Unconditional Cash Transfer
UI 	
User Interface
UID 	
Unique Identifier
UN 	
United Nations
URL	
Uniform Resource Locator
USD 	
U.S. Dollor
UX 	
User Experience
VNSO 	
Vanuatu National Statistics Office
VUV 	
Vanuatu Vatu
WFP 	
World Food Programme 

--- Page 6 ---
4    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
1. Executive Summary
Overview of project and findings
1	
Stablecoins are “cryptoassets that are developed with the aim of minimising price volatility by embedding a stability mechanism” (Berentsen and Schär 2019, p65). 
DAI is a collateralised stablecoin with on-chain collateral pegged to the U.S. Dollar (USD). This is distinct to algorithmic stablecoins or collateralised stablecoin with 
off-chain collateral.
During the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Oxfam in partnership with Sempo and ConsenSys distributed 966,443 Vanuatu Vatu (VUV) or 
11,896.91 Australian Dollars (AUD) to 187 heads of households and 29 vendors, which was estimated to have directly benefited some 
1,209 individuals in two urban communities in one of the world’s most at-risk countries.
Over the course of a month, Oxfam and its partners were able to successfully deliver a first-of-its-kind Distributed Ledger 
Technology (DLT) based solution employing the Dai (DAI) stablecoin.1 Additionally, the system piloted in Vanuatu saw the successful 
deployment of a novel near-field communication (NFC) card, which in tandem with a ‘side-channel’ developed by Sempo, allowed the 
system to cope with poor internet connectivity while ensuring double-spends were impossible despite offline transactions.
Oxfam set out to determine whether DLTs can reduce the cost and transaction time of cash and voucher assistance (CVA), while improving 
transparency, security, and overall user experience (UX) within the urban context of Port Vila, Republic of Vanuatu.
With the support of Sempo, the UnBlocked Cash pilot has shown modest cost-savings and significant time-savings related to 
operational activities. Onboarding recipients to the platform was reduced to an average of 3.6 minutes per individual compared to 
over an hour during the Ambae volcano response in 2018. Additionally, the tested system eliminated slow identity (ID) verifications 
and reduced dependency on post offices or banks to deposit cheques.
However, there is little evidence that the direct time and cost of financial transaction between programme stakeholder accounts has been 
reduced. This is due to the reliance on existing financial service providers (FSPs) for foreign exchange and cashing-out vendors in this 
particular implementation. In contrast, the indirect time and cost appear to have fallen due to the efficacy gains promoted by the Sempo 
platform. Fortunately, the unexpected challenges with the existing FSP in Vanuatu created an opportunity to test a more community-
integrated hub-and-spoke cash-out mechanism via the ‘Super Vendor’ model.
The quality of the tested solution, which encompassed transparency, security, and user experience indicators, was found to be 
extremely high. Recipient and vendor feedback alike indicates an overwhelming preference for assistance of this type.

--- Page 7 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    5
Figure 1: Pango Village, Vanuatu: Kalua Salerua, Cash Transfer Coordinator, leading a focus group discussion with recipients. 
Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 8 ---
6    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Distributed ledger technologies (DLTs) are among the most 
promising innovations to have emerged during the last decade, 
with the potential to fundamentally transform existing economic, 
institutional and social systems. Often referred to as ‘Blockchains’ 
in honour of the first example developed by Satoshi Nakamoto, 
these distributed ledgers present enormous social and commercial 
potential across a range of sectors and have been broadly applied 
by several of the largest humanitarian actors, including Oxfam.
The promise of these technologies to deliver aid at low cost 
while reducing transaction times and streamlining reporting has 
obvious appeal at a time where humanitarian budgets are under 
increasing pressure. However, DLTs have also been used to enhance 
the transparency of supply chains, ensure wages and working 
conditions meet acceptable standards, and deliver tamper-proof 
voting systems among many other applications.
In recent years, DLTs have seen increasing support among non-
government organisations (NGOs) as a means of delivering financial 
assistance in place of traditional in-kind support, especially among 
the unbanked.2 Many of these DLT-based interventions build on an 
upswell of support for cash and voucher assistance (CVA), which 
also promise to change the way aid is delivered. Unlike in-kind 
support, market-based interventions like CVA stimulate local 
economies and promote personal agency.
Initiatives like the Grand Bargain, drafted during the World 
Humanitarian Summit in 2016, called for signatories to “increase 
the use and coordination of cash-based programming”, which 
coincided with a reported 40 per cent increase in cash and 
voucher-based humanitarian assistance by local and international 
NGOs together with the United Nations (UN) through 2015–2016 
(Smith 2018, p6).
This workstream continued to perform well in 2018 according to 
an independent report by the Humanitarian Policy Group. “The two 
largest UN humanitarian agencies scaled up their use of cash 
and vouchers in 2018: WFP’s cash and voucher programming 
increased by 21%, to $1.7 billion, reaching 20 million people in 2018, 
compared to $1.4 billion and 19.2 million people in 2017; UNHCR 
programmed $568 million in cash in 2018, up from $502 million in 
2017 (an increase of 13%). UNICEF programmed $184 million to 2.4 
million households in 2018” (Metcalfe-Hough et al 2019, p38).
Overall, 44 per cent of signatories report ‘Good Progress’, however, 
CVA accounted for only 10 per cent of humanitarian assistance in 
2016, up by 2.5 per cent from 2015 (Metcalfe-Hough et al 2019, p38; 
Smith 2018, p3).
Despite the advantages of CVA, these interventions can incur 
significant costs associated with transferring value through 
financial incumbents and often exclude the unbanked. Voucher 
systems that intend to address financial inclusion are nevertheless 
2	
The unbanked are those without a formal account issued by an FSP. While financial inclusion is on the rise globally, “1.7 billion adults remain unbanked, yet two-
thirds of them own a mobile phone that could help them access financial services” (The World Bank 2018).
3	
Pacific Cash Preparedness Partnership, is an effort by Oxfam, Save the Children, and the World Food Programme (WFP) and others, to raise awareness of cash and 
voucher assistance in Vanuatu, Fiji, and Solomon Islands, while increasing the capacity and expertise in the area over four years between 2017–2020.
slow to distribute and reconcile, which in turn drives high 
operational costs for the issuing donor or NGO. This is particularly 
true of paper-based systems as e-vouchers and pre-paid 
debit card solutions are typically faster than their paper-based 
equivalents. Even so, it is important to note that no matter 
the delivery method, CVA is generally less costly than in-kind 
assistance (Smith 2018, p.80).
DLT-based CVA offers the potential to not only reduce transfer 
fees by eliminating incumbents, but also by streamlining recipient 
onboarding and automating reporting. Additionally, an appropriately 
designed DLT-based intervention can function independently of 
financial service providers (FSPs), which allows for total inclusion of 
unbanked recipients.
DLT-based solutions represent an enormous opportunity for 
disaster responders and development actors to drive social impact 
and improve quality of life in alignment with the United Nations’ 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), while also meeting several 
Grand Bargain commitments concerning transparency, reduced 
management costs, and simplifying reporting.
Given this potential, Oxfam sought to explore the flexibility and 
applicability of DLTs for CVA in the Pacific to build on the existing 
Pacific Cash Preparedness Partnership.3 
The design of the UnBlocked Cash pilot and the objectives of this 
subsequent research was explicitly informed by the ‘Commitments 
for Cash Transfer Programming’ as proposed by Cash Learning 
Partnership (CaLP). This includes actions related to capacity 
building, ensuring programme quality, strengthening coordination, 
and inventing in research and innovation. See section 3.2. ‘Guiding 
frameworks’ for more information.
The UnBlocked Cash pilot was designed to address challenges 
of CVA in the Pacific region while evaluating the transformative 
characteristics and social impacts of DLTs on communities at risk 
from disasters. Ultimately, this pilot set out to determine whether 
DLTs can reduce the cost and transaction time of CVA while 
improving transparency, security, and overall user experience (UX) 
within the urban context of Port Vila, Republic of Vanuatu.
To that end, Oxfam in partnership with Sempo and ConsenSys 
distributed 966,443 Vanuatu Vatu (VUV) or 11,896.91 Australian 
Dollars (AUD) to 187 heads of households and 29 vendors via a 
sub-currency of the Ethereum platform designated DAI, ‘wrapped’ 
in a Crypto Collateralized Voucher (CCV), and issued on near-
field communication (NFC) card designed for low-connectivity 
environments.
This report will address some of the most common assumptions 
surrounding DLT-based cash transfers and present the most potent 
findings from the four week UnBlocked Cash pilot in Pango and Mele 
Maat on the island of Efate in the Republic of Vanuatu.
2. Introduction

--- Page 9 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    7
3. Background & Context
In March 2018, Oxfam Australia (OAU) established OxLabs, an 
innovation hub designed to challenge the traditional ways of 
working within the organisation, while pursuing new solutions to 
address development and humanitarian challenges. The cross-
disciplinary team was assembled from across the organisation 
with support from volunteers and external specialists. This 
process brought together humanitarians, disaster risk reduction 
advisers and cash programming experts alongside technologists 
and finance professionals.
In addition to its own activities, the OxLabs team has supported 
a number of initiatives across the Oxfam confederation and 
developed partnerships across the humanitarian sector related 
to DLT-based solutions, most notably as a member of the 
‘Identity Alliance’ with TypeHuman and Australian Red Cross. 
This aim of this partnership is to develop a DLT-based self-
sovereign identity solution to quickly and safely deploy and 
manage humanitarians, ensuring that they hold the necessary 
qualifications and safety checks (Australian Red Cross 2018).
Among Oxfam’s own initiatives globally are the BlocRice project 
and the OxChain ‘Smart Donations’ app, which holds value in 
escrow to allow programmable donations to trigger the release 
of value when particular donor-defined conditions are met 
(OxChain n.d.).
The BlocRice project works with small-holder organic rice 
farmers in Cambodia’s Preah Vihear province to verify the 
conditions of their contracts with the Agricultural Cooperative. 
Additionally, BlocRice tracks the rice from farmer to retailer via 
all the intermediates and ensures the farmer is paid the correct 
amount in a timely fashion (Oxfam in Cambodia 2019).
During the early stages of the UnBlocked Cash initiative, the 
OxLabs team observed that CVA was typically slow to set up, 
and the delivery of payments to participants endure long lead 
times. Additionally, CVA often incurs high staff costs related 
to monitoring and reconciliation, payments processing, 
and recipient registration. Finally, the team noted a lack of 
transparency regarding the redemption and use of ‘cash’ by 
recipients. According to a report by the WFP (2015), operational 
costs for food distribution following Severe Tropical Cyclone 
Pam in Vanuatu during 2015 were as high as VUV 79.61/AUD 
0.98 for every VUV 81.23/AUD 1 of food delivered where food 
costs represented USD 1,779,399 of a total USD 3,521,037 spent. 
By comparison, Oxfam’s 2018–19 Ambae volcano response 
delivered multipurpose grants at an operational cost of VUV 
27.62/AUD 0.34 per VUV 81.23/AUD 1 provided to recipients. 
These observations lead OxLabs to research the investigations 
covered in this report via the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
Note: The WFP’s operational costs were converted from USD at a 
mid-market-rate of 1 USD = 1.39902 AUD for the purposes of this 
comparison. VUV costs are based on the mid-market-rate of 1 VUV 
= 0.01231 AUD. Both rates were captured from XE on 22 April 2019, 
the day the pilot commenced.
Figure 2: Port Vila, Vanuatu: Sempo working alongside the Oxfam in Vanuatu team on the pilot design. (L-R) Nick Williams (Sempo), Sandra Hart (OiV), 
Melanie Hardman (Sempo) and Vivian Fischer (OiV). Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 10 ---
8    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
3.1. UnBlocked Cash partners
3.1.1. Sempo
Sempo is an Australian-based start-up co-founded by Nick 
Williams and Tristan Cole in July 2017. Since then, Sempo has 
delivered cash to 150 Syrian families in Lebanon and helped 
distribute aid to refugees in Athens and Iraqi Kurdistan. Its 
mission is to efficiently distribute relief funds to at-risk 
communities across the globe while increasing financial 
inclusion. Sempo is a privately held for-profit company backed 
by early-stage investors in Australia and US, including SOSV, 
Blackbird Ventures, H2 Ventures, Startmate, and dLab.
Sempo was one of six shortlisted companies invited by Oxfam to 
propose a technical solution to help evaluate the cost, quality, 
and time efficiency of DLT-based humanitarian CVA in Vanuatu. 
Sempo submitted a joint submission with ConsenSys, which 
was also among the six. Sempo was then engaged as a service 
provider for the UnBlocked Cash pilot in February 2019.
Sempo provided its existing software platform, including 
a ‘Dashboard’ and Android app. The platform was modified 
to respond to Oxfam’s requirements, which included a new 
distribution model incorporating DAI and a novel NFC card 
designed to function in low-connectivity environments. During 
the four weeks of the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Sempo’s co-founder 
Nick Williams and head of humanitarian operations Melanie 
Hardman travelled to Vanuatu to oversee the implementation 
and maintenance of the Sempo platform. They supported Oxfam 
staff in Vanuatu in participant registration and onboarding. They 
trained Oxfam staff in Vanuatu and pilot participants on the 
platform and contributed to programme monitoring.
Figure 3: ConsenSys staff (L-R) Brianna Davis, Kris Randall and Rosa Thompson pictured during the UnBlocked Cash pilot. 
Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 11 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    9
3.1.2. Consensys
ConsenSys was founded by Joseph Lubin in 2015. It self-
describes as a “… global blockchain technology company 
building the infrastructure, applications, and practices that 
enable a decentralized world”.
ConsenSys joined Sempo in response to Oxfam’s request for 
proposal. ConsenSys staff included researchers and media 
specialists charged with the task of reporting on the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot and making recommendations for future scale-up.
Both companies contributed to an Oxfam-led programme 
workshop and post-pilot learning session. Members of the team 
also joined an Oxfam film crew in Vanuatu during the pilot’s first 
round to document and learn from the pilot process.
3.2. Guiding frameworks
The UnBlocked Cash pilot addresses a number of the Grand 
Bargain commitments, while also fostering Oxfam’s alignment 
with the Global Framework for Action defined by the Cash Learning 
Partnership (CaLP). In particular, these pilots have been developed 
to address the humanitarian sector’s appetite for greater 
transparency and accountability to both donors and communities, 
while also increasing the amount of cash-based programming 
and simplified reporting requirements. Both the Grand Bargain 
commitments and CaLP framework are included below for reference.
The Grand Bargain Commitments:
1.	 Greater transparency
2.	 More support and funding tools for local and national 
responders
3.	 Increase the use and coordination of cash-based 
programming
4.	 Reduce duplication and management costs with periodic 
functional reviews
5.	 Improve joint and impartial needs assessments
6.	 A participation revolution: include people receiving aid in 
making the decisions which affect their lives
7.	 Increase collaborative humanitarian multi-year planning and 
funding
8.	 Reduce the earmarking of donor contributions
9.	 Harmonise and simplify reporting requirements
10.	Enhance engagement between humanitarian and 
development actors
Global Framework for Action:
A Consolidated Summary of Commitments for Cash Transfer 
Programming
1.	 Ensure sufficient funding is available for cash transfer 
programming
2.	 Ensure cash is routinely considered, alongside other tools
3.	 Build sufficient capacity for cash transfer programming
4.	 Ensure the quality of cash transfer programming
5.	 Strengthen coordination of cash transfer programming
6.	 Strengthen the evidence base and invest in innovation
3.3. Country Context
The Republic of Vanuatu is an archipelago of volcanic origin 
composed of 82 islands in the South Pacific some 1,750 
kilometres east of northern Australia (The Logistics Cluster n.d.). 
Its population of 272,459 comprises primarily Ni-Vanuatu people 
of Melanesia ethnicity speaking Bislama, an English-based 
creole language, which is first of three national languages 
followed by English and French. Nonetheless, there are more 
than 80 different language groups among the islands and 
a great diversity of social structures (VNSO 2016, p.1; The 
Logistics Cluster n.d.).
Roughly 75.13 per cent of the population are based in rural 
areas, while the remaining urban populace primarily occupies 
Luganville on Espiritu Santo island and the nation’s capital 
Port Vila on Efate island (VNSO 2016, p.1, 18, 38). Vanuatu’s 
three largest islands—Espiritu Santo, Malekula, and Efate—
accommodate more than half of the total population (VNSO 
2016, p.1).
Six provincial councils administer Vanuatu; Torba, Sanma, 
Penama, Malampa, Shefa, and Tafea. Municipal governments 
administer the provincial capitals of Port Vila in Shefa province, 
Luganville in Sanma province, and Lenakel in Tafea province. 
Meanwhile, the National Council of Chiefs upholds matters of 
custom and tradition.
The World Risk Index considers Vanuatu as the country with 
the highest disaster risk of the 172 countries included in the 
report (Heintze et al 2018, p.6, 53). Situated on the infamous 
Ring of Fire and within the Cyclone Belt, Vanuatu experiences 
many geophysical and hydro-meteorological hazards, including 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, landslides, 
cyclones, floods and droughts.
Figure 4: Map of Vanuatu.
vanuatu
fiji
australia

--- Page 12 ---
10    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
This high disaster risk and the vast distance between markets 
on each of the islands restrict economic development. Economic 
activity is concentrated in the two most populous urban centres 
of Port Vila and Luganville. While the islands of Tanna and Malekula 
also boast commercial centres, economic activity is hampered by 
the absence of international cargo ports.
Much of the country’s food is produced locally by way of own-
account production, resulting in generally very low levels of 
extreme poverty. However, sea-based imports are critical for 
fuel, manufactured goods and non-perishable foods, which fill 
the shelves of many of the UnBlocked Cash vendors. The quality 
of transport infrastructure limits the movement of these goods. 
Many remote areas rely on small vessels with outboard motors 
or light aircraft capable of operating on grass airstrips.
Vanuatu is predominately a cash-based society, with an average 
of 68 per cent of an individual’s total income derived from cash 
sources (VNSO 2010, p.vi). The Household Income and Expenditure 
Survey (2010) reports that 90 per cent of households had some form 
of cash income—with 99 per cent of urban households and 91 per 
cent of rural households having ‘cash’ sources of income (p.27). 
Wages and salaries account for 39 per cent of household income; 
meanwhile, 59 per cent of urban households and 92 per cent of 
rural households received income from own-account production 
(p.26). This includes goods produced and consumed in the home, 
such as food and firewood.
Population growth is estimated at 2.3 per cent nationally, and 
the average household is estimated to represent 4.8 members 
(p.1). However, the combined average of Pango and Mele Maat is 
estimated to be closer to 5.6 members based on data collected 
for this report.
According to Vanuatu’s National Population and Housing Census 
(2009), 12 per cent of the total population reported a disability 
and the proportion of females with a disability was marginally 
higher than that of males.
“Gender-based inequality is deeper in urban areas, compared 
to rural areas, and, to some extent, reflects wage inequality. 
Women’s share of the benefits from economic growth has 
been less than men’s with more of the growth being in 
male-dominated jobs such as construction. More women are 
vulnerable to falling below the poverty line than are men. The 
unemployed poor, elderly and people with disabilities are more 
vulnerable in urban areas than in rural areas” (VNSO and UNDP 
2010, p.17).
In Port Villa, 23.3 per cent of people with disabilities are living 
below the ‘Basic Needs Poverty Line’, although there is no 
gender gap reported, which is not the case in other parts of the 
country (p.57).
Regulations governing CVA in Vanuatu are the same as those 
that apply to any financial transaction, which is overseen 
by the Financial Intelligence Unit under the Reserve Bank of 
Vanuatu.4 Generally, these include anti-money laundering (AML), 
counter-terrorism financing (CTF) and know-your-customer 
4	
More information on the Financial Intelligence Unit and its polices are available at: https://fiu.gov.vu/
(KYC) statutes requiring due diligence and record-keeping of the 
recipients’ ID, the transferred amount, and intended use of the 
transferred amount.
3.3.1. Pango
Pango is located some seven kilometres south of downtown Port 
Vila at the mouth of Erakor Lagoon. It is one of five peri-urban 
villages, including Mele-Maat, Mele, Ifira, and Erakor “along with 
significant settlements of migrants from other areas of Vanuatu 
who have relocated on the outskirts of town” (Rawlings 1999, p.72).
Just 3 per cent of Efate’s population lives in Pango, approximately 
2,326 people, in contrast to 50,944 in Port Vila (VNSO 2016, p.38). 
Pango reports 460 heads of households, which prominently cater 
to 6–9 people. These people primarily live in one family house 
detached from any other house (p.156). Approximately 73 per 
cent of household heads own their home (p.166), and 61 per cent 
holds a customary land title, only 10 per cent occupy with informal 
arrangements (p.164).
Source: Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) (2016) Mini - 
Census Report.
49.37 per cent of the 1,513 people surveyed hold a bank account 
with a commercial bank, while 7.93 per cent holds an account 
with a non-commercial bank (p.141–142). This leaves a significant 
number of residents unbanked.
The vast majority of residents, 98.23 per cent of the 2,322 surveyed, 
hold a birth certificate which served as identification for the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot (p.125).
Figure 5: Map of Pango on the island of Efate.
Name
Total
1
2
3
4
5
6–9
10+
Pango
460
20
45
69
80
80
137
29
Table 1: Household size
PANGO
port vila
Bauerfield 
International 
Airport

--- Page 13 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    11
3.3.2. Mele Maat
Mele Maat was established in 1952 by Ambrymese relocating the 
village of Maat from Ambrym after the eruption of the island’s 
volcano—evidence of Vanuatu’s volatile state (Rawlings 1999, 
p.75). The village is located west of the Bauerfield International 
Airport and approximately 20–25 mins by car from downtown 
Port Vila.
Data on Mele Maat is scarce as it is not disaggregated in the 
national census data. According to data collected by Oxfam 
staff in Vanuatu, the average household is composed of roughly 
six people.
56.98 per cent of households in Mele Maat own a phone 
compared with 70.30 per cent in Pango. Similarly, fewer people 
hold bank accounts—only 39.53 per cent of household heads 
surveyed reported having a bank account in the family in 
contrast to the 47.52 per cent in Pango. These finding may 
indicate slightly lower household income in Mele Maat compared 
with Pango.
Figure 7: Map of Mele Maat on the island of Efate.
Figure 6: Registration site in Pango pictured with a shuttle that is used to transport a community member with a disability. 
Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
MELE MAAT
port vila
Bauerfield 
International 
Airport

--- Page 14 ---
12    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
3.4. Cash and voucher assistance
Cash and voucher assistance (CVA) are mechanisms by which cash, 
vouchers, or alternative representations of value are provided 
directly to recipients to be exchanged for goods or services. CaLP 
insists that this term is only used to describe “… the provision 
of cash transfers or vouchers given to individuals, household or 
community recipients; not to governments or other state actors.” 
This form of assistance excludes remittances and microfinance, 
although microfinance and money transfer institutions may be 
used for the provisioning of value. It is also important to note that, 
CaLP only supports the use of the terms ‘cash’ or ‘cash assistance’ 
when referring specifically to unrestricted assistance in the form of 
physical currency or e-cash.
These mechanisms are often considered recent innovations, 
and yet Red Cross is recorded as having employed CVA as early 
as the Franco-Prussian war in 1870–1871, and in response to 
famine during 19th-century India and Botswana in the 1980s 
(Harvey and Bailey 2015, p2). In recent years, however, CVA has 
become an increasingly common tool in emergency response 
and recovery efforts (Harvey and Bailey 2015, p.2; Mercy Corps 
n.d., p.1–2).
Compared to in-kind assistance that is typically food, household 
goods, medical supplies, building materials, and education—a 
market-based approach, as represented by CVA—can be more 
dignified and empowering for recipients who are free to define 
and respond to their own needs with locally available resources 
(OCHA n.d.). Some within the humanitarian sector consider CVA a 
complement to the provision of in-kind assistance (OCHA n.d.). 
Meanwhile, others argue that when appropriate and in the right 
context, where local markets are functioning well and can meet 
demand, market-based approaches are preferable to in-kind 
assistance, which has until recently accounted for the vast 
majority of international aid (Harvey and Bailey 2015, p.3; Mercy 
Corps n.d. p.1–2).
This approach also ensures foreign assistance does not 
undermine local human or market capacity, hereby, promoting 
local economies to recover more quickly (Mercy Corps n.d., 
p.1–2). This is especially important for signatories to the Charter 
for Change and the Grand Bargain such as Oxfam.
The Overseas Development Institute (ODI) (2015, p.8) estimates 
that “cash transfers are among the most well-researched and 
rigorously-evaluated humanitarian tools of the last decade”. 
GiveWell (2012), the U.S. based nonprofit dedicated to effective 
altruism, largely agrees, but argues that evidence drawing 
a direct connection to particular humanitarian outcomes 
is sparse. Nevertheless, it states: “cash transfers have the 
strongest track record we’ve seen for a non-health intervention, 
and are a priority program of ours”.
The acceptance of such mechanisms is further exemplified by one 
practitioner quoted in the Mercy Corps ‘Cash Transfer Programming 
Toolkit’ (n.d., p.2), who commented that “the discussion is no 
longer about whether cash transfer programming is a legitimate 
intervention type, but about how best to use cash assistance”. 
Meanwhile, within Oxfam, “If not market-based, why not?” is a 
common refrain (Oxfam in Vanuatu 2017).
While Oxfam’s experience with market-based approaches dates 
back to the 1990s, its commitment has increased sharply from 
2005 to now, during which time it has implemented programmes 
in more than 40 countries. Today, Oxfam favours aid delivered 
through local markets, while also working to support and 
strengthen local capacity by improving access to credit, and 
rehabilitating infrastructure (Oxfam 2015).
In contrast to traditional non-market-based assistance or 
conventional nonfungible aid, CVA is delivered in a fungible 
form, which is easily exchangeable with other assets. However, 
some limitations may be applied depending on whether or not 
the assistance is conditional or unconditional. A conditional 
cash transfer (CCT) places restrictions on how a recipient can 
spend their assigned value. This might include where the value 
can be spent or on what, i.e. food, healthcare, or education 
(OCHA n.d.). Unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) or multipurpose 
grants are provided to recipients without any obligations or 
limitations (OCHA n.d.). The second provides greater agency 
to recipients, and is the most market-based approach. While 
users showed a preference for multipurpose grants during the 
Ambae volcano response in 2018, Vanuatu’s government voiced 
a preference for the use of vouchers instead of unconditional 
cash in past consultations with Oxfam staff in Vanuatu.
Regardless of the mode by which CVA is delivered, all 
programmes generally share the same objectives of providing 
timely, cost-effective assistance to crisis-affected populations, 
while supporting local economies (CaLP n.d.). Where 
programmes differ is in the amount of value transferred, the 
means and frequency of the transfers, and the duration of the 
programme. These differences are the focus of this report.
3.5. Distributed Ledger Technologies
When Lehman Brothers filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
protection in September 2008, it signalled the beginning of a 
worldwide collapse of the banking sector at an unprecedented 
scale. Within months of this event, a mysterious person or 
persons named Satoshi Nakamoto retaliated with a digital 
currency believed to be impervious to unpredictable monetary 
policies or political influence (Tapscott 2016; Davis 2011).
In the case of Nakamoto’s Bitcoin (BTC), the underlying 
technologies are unified by the name Blockchain, which was 
the first of many distributed, append-only ledgers, generically 
known as Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs). Among the 
most notable DLTs to emerge since Blockchain is Ethereum, first 
made publicly available on July 30, 2015. Ethereum is the DLT on 
which the UnBlocked Cash pilot relies.
As with traditional ledgers, DLTs allow users to enter and retrieve 
data within a database. However, unlike conventional ledgers, 
the entries of a distributed ledger are spread among a series 
of nodes or participants in which the data is cryptographically 
and immutably stored in every copy as a series of ‘blocks’. Once 
data is assigned to a block, it cannot be altered retroactively 
except by colluding with the network majority to simultaneously 
change all subsequent blocks. This characteristic is only true of 
‘append-only’ ledgers like that of the Ethereum ‘mainnet’, not all 
DLTs necessarily behave this way.

--- Page 15 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    13
It is also worth noting that app developers have the freedom 
to choose what is coded onto the chain or merely referenced 
by off-chain code. The former creates greater degrees of 
immutability, while the latter allows for a degree of changeability 
or mutability.
DLTs can be described in many ways; however, there are three 
characteristics that are particularly important in the context of this 
pilot; these are transparency, immutability, and disintermediation.
It is important to note that no two DLTs are exactly alike by 
design and even less so in deployment. As such, transparency, 
immutability, and disintermediation are not inherent to all 
DLT-based solutions. The UnBlocked Cash pilot revealed some 
limitations of these properties under certain conditions. While 
transparency was important, participants could not easily check 
their balances. Meanwhile, disintermediation was undermined 
by the reliance on incumbent FSPs related to unforeseen 
complexities of actors cashing out of the system. See section 6. 
‘Stories’ for a more detailed explanation of these limitations.
3.5.1. Transparency
Oxfam believes, at minimum, transparency for the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot means “anyone with access to the network can view 
a history of transactions in real-time” (Galen 2018, p.8). Oxfam 
acknowledges that not everyone served by the Sempo platform 
has access or the literacy to comprehend the information stored 
on the network. Nevertheless, by deploying the solution to the 
Ethereum mainnet, Sempo ensures that the platform meets 
Oxfam’s definition.
The mainnet is the primary public network whereby transactions 
are entered into Ethereum’s distributed ledger. The mainnet 
is contrasted by the ‘testnet’, where applications can be 
developed, and virtual currencies with no actual value can be 
traded to test systems in a safe environment.
Unliked the mainnet, which is a distributed computer spanning 
thousands of nodes, a testnet can be installed on a single 
server or on a group of servers under centralised control. 
As such, only applications running on the mainnet can take 
full advantage of Ethereum’s robust decentralisation and 
transparent public record.
The decentralisation of computing power and record-keeping 
creates redundancies, which reduces the risks associated with 
single-point dependency.
Since Ethereum is a permissionless DLT, trust is established 
by way of contracts embedded in digital code and stored in 
transparent, tamper-resistant shared databases. Without 
decentralisation, this trust mechanism does not work.
3.5.2. Immutability
Entangled with transparency is immutability. This characteristic 
speaks to the tamper-proof nature of the typical public 
distributed ledger. Data committed to the distributed ledger 
cannot be altered retroactively, except by colluding with the 
network majority to simultaneously change all subsequent 
blocks. This is practically impossible with current technology.
This characteristic is both powerful and potentially harmful 
depending on the nature of the information committed to 
the distributed ledger. Since data cannot be deleted, storing 
personal information is in tension with right-to-be-forgotten 
laws. As such the UnBlocked Cash pilot does not store any 
personally identifiable information on the Ethereum mainnet.
It is important to note that immutability is not guaranteed on 
private deployments of a DLT like Ethereum. Immutability is 
ensured by many different participants acting on the network, 
allowing the system to compare one actor’s copy of the ledger 
to that of the others. If a single actor owns a network, no 
number of nodes ensures immutability, as that one actor is free 
to delete or modify data on each node.
One such example is the World Food Programme’s (WFPs) 
Building Blocks project. Like UnBlocked Cash, Building Blocks is 
built on Ethereum with the aim of making voucher-based cash 
transfers more efficient, transparent and secure, while also 
improving collaboration across the humanitarian system. While 
the World Food Programme (WFP) should be commended for 
the excess of USD 11 million worth of entitlements processed 
through the system to date, it is questionable whether just 
four nodes with one controlling entity can promote greater 
transparency and security. To WFPs credit, the agency has 
announced an ambition to onboard UN Women as the first 
non-WFP participating entity on the platform (Coppi and Fast 
2019, p11). See section 3.5.5. ‘The Importance of Trust’ for 
more information.
3.5.3. Disintermediation
Disintermediation is the process of removing entrenched third-
party intermediaries from an exchange. Since DLTs can stand-in 
for the traditional agents of trust like banks and governments, 
they are able to facilitate peer-to-peer (P2P) exchanges at a 
low financial cost. This is key to the assumption that DLTs can 
reduce the time and cost required for a transaction.
However, if actors are not directly connected by the DLT, 
disintermediation is also not guaranteed.
3.5.4. Degree of Participation
Broadly speaking, DLTs can fall into one of four quadrants 
defined by the degree of participation, see Figure 8. On one 
axis a DLT can either be public (open) or private (closed). The 
former often provides the option for pseudonymity, while 
the latter emerges as the preferred approach for enterprise 
implementations (Mercy Corps 2017, p.11). The second axis 
relates to the degree to which a participant is allowed to 
interact with the functions of the distributed ledger. On the 
permissioned end, users are only given access to the parts of 
the distributed ledger that a higher authority deems appropriate. 
While on the permissionless end, every participant enjoys the 
same level of read/write access (Mercy Corps 2017, p.12). This is 
typical on public distributed ledgers like the Ethereum mainnet 
used by Sempo for the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
It is important to note that the UnBlocked Cash pilot issued 
NFC cards to recipients on account of the low connectivity 

--- Page 16 ---
14    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
and technical literacy in the target area. This limits the degree 
to which the participants can interact with the platform. The 
question of participation is a conceptual point that bears 
mentioning, but in the context of this pilot, it was considered 
more important to address the low connectivity, ease of 
use, and recipient dignity. The NFC cards, described in a 
later section, allow previously unbanked recipients to make 
contactless transactions familiar to anyone who has used a 
conventional payment card.
3.5.5. The Importance of Trust
To understand how disintermediation is possible, it is essential 
to understand how DLTs stand-in for trusted intermediaries. 
First, consider the elements required to establish trust in a 
typical exchange—a valid identity and a record of ownership, 
both of which must be verifiable.
To verify identity, DLTs rely on public-key or asymmetric 
cryptography. This technology depends on a set of keys issued 
to each user, one private and the other public. Galen (2018, p.9) 
draws the comparison of a public key with an account number 
and the private key as similar to a password.
Meanwhile, to prove ownership, DLTs employ a technology 
called cryptographic hashing, a process by which data is 
algorithmically shortened. Here the immutable quality of a 
DLT comes to bear, since each new block contains a hashed 
representation of the data stored in the previous block. “Once 
a piece of data is hashed, any change to the data causes the 
hash value to change. By comparing hash values, any observer 
can easily detect whether an alteration has been made to the 
original data” (Mercy Corps 2017, p.10).
5	
Smart-contracts define a set of actions that will automatically trigger a new series of actions (Coppi and Fast 2019, p.vi).
6	
The Ethereum token API is currently debated as an ERC (Ethereum request for comment) and may be outdated. Information on Ethereum Standardized Contract APIs is 
available at: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20
7	
In proof-of-work (PoW) based DLTs, the algorithm rewards participants who solve cryptographic puzzles to validate transactions and create new blocks (Ethereum 
2019). This computationally demanding and thus energy-intensive process is referred to as ‘mining’, which is a critical component of Nakamoto’s Blockchain and the 
current implementation of Ethereum. However, more secure and energy-efficient proof-of-stake (PoS) DLTs, such as Ethereum’s forthcoming Casper implementation, 
trade puzzle-solving for a turn-based voting system in which the weight of each validator’s vote depends on the size of its deposit (Ethereum 2019).
Finally, the network must arrive at ‘distributed consensus’. 
This process begins with one or more nodes in the network 
receiving and inspecting transaction data. If the data is found 
to be incomplete or flawed, the transaction will be rejected; 
otherwise, the validated transaction data is broadcast to the 
nodes in the peer-to-peer network. Once the nodes receive the 
data, they must agree on which “… transactions will be added to 
the block and in which order” (Mercy Corps 2017, p.9).
Neither asymmetric cryptography nor hash technology is by any 
means new, but it is the unique way that DLTs combine these 
concepts with P2P networked ledgers/databases that enable 
previously impossible applications.
3.6. Ethereum
Unlike Nakamoto’s Blockchain, which was designed to transmit 
and store its native cryptocurrency designated BTC, Ethereum is 
better characterised as a decentralised global computer on top 
of which developers can program decentralised applications.
There are principally three types of applications described in 
the Ethereum Wiki (2019), these are: financial, semi-financial, 
and non-financial. The Sempo platform is a financial application 
that provides Oxfam with a more powerful way of managing 
aid distribution with the support of ERC20 smart-contracts. 
Generally, smart-contracts are stores of value that only 
unlock if certain predefined conditions are met.5 On the Sempo 
platform, they are used to record transfers of value between 
pseudonymous addresses, which are reconciled with identities 
using an internal database. The ERC20 designation refers to the 
technical standard for smart-contracts running on Ethereum.6 
It guarantees consistent access to several vital functions, 
which facilitate the transfer of tokens from one address to 
another and the approval of a third-party address to transfer a 
specified amount of tokens from an address.
Just like the Blockchain, Ethereum produces a native 
cryptocurrency named ‘Ether’ (ETH) following a proof-of-work 
model.7 ETH shares many of the same fundamental features 
as BTC, including decentralisation, scarcity, and an absence 
of government control (Ethereum, n.d.). It is an entirely digital 
asset, which is available to anyone with a sufficiently advanced 
internet-connected device to make payments, store value, or 
use as collateral.
In some contexts, including Vanuatu, the use of 
cryptocurrencies like ETH and BTC are not permitted. As such, 
the solution developed for the UnBlocked Cash pilot holds value 
in a sub-currency designated DAI, which is ‘wrapped’ in a Crypto 
Collateralised Voucher (CCV) to be used in-country. See section 
3.7. ‘Stablecoins and Dai’ for more information.
Figure 8: The degree of participation allowed by a DLT depends on the 
two axis of this diagram.
permissionless
permissioned
private
public
open, free
closed, free
open, controlled
closed, controlled

--- Page 17 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    15
The CCV ensures that only pre-approved participants of the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot are permitted to access value, which is a 
critical component of the AML considerations made by Sempo. It 
also insures that donor funds are tied to the programme, which 
protects against poor budget management or re-allocation by 
the NGO.
To create a CCV token during the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Sempo 
would issue 1 DAI to the governing smart-contract, which held 
the DAI in escrow. To release DAI from escrow, one must provide 
the smart-contract with a CCV token. However, to make this trade, 
one’s address must be on a whitelist defined by Sempo and stored 
in the smart-contract. As a result, only selected participants could 
access the underlying value of a CCV token, which can theoretically 
be sold at an exchange for fiat currency. This limitation ensures 
that no cryptocurrency was traded in Vanuatu and the CCV token 
was not in violation of AML regulations.
As mentioned in section 3.5.2. ‘Immutability’, Ethereum can be 
privately deployed to servers accessible to only a small number 
of users. In Oxfam’s experience, this is the common configuration 
among DLT-based CVA providers. The UnBlocked Cash pilot was 
proudly deployed to the Ethereum mainnet, which ensures that no 
single entity controls the data associated with the pilot.
By running the UnBlocked Cash pilot on Ethereum, Oxfam joined 
the largest and most active DLT-based community in the world, 
one that actively maintains and improves the technology over 
time—which is essential as Ethereum has no centralised control 
over the platform.
3.7. Stablecoins and Dai
According to the Ethereum Wiki (2019), “One of the main 
problems with Bitcoin is the issue of price volatility. The value 
of a Bitcoin often experiences very large fluctuations, rising or 
falling by as much as 25% in a single day and 3x in a month”. 
Since the price of many cryptocurrencies is directly proportional 
to demand, which is unpredictable, volatility is common among 
these digital assets, including Ethereum’s own ETH. This makes 
the use of cryptocurrencies a risky prospect for aid delivery.
One solution to this problem is to create a cryptocurrency 
that tracks a specific asset. This kind of collateral-backed 
cryptocurrency is commonly known as a stablecoin since the 
value is ‘stable’ relative to a trusted asset.
The UnBlocked Cash pilot takes advantage of the Dai Stablecoin 
System, which was specifically designed to address the stable 
exchange of value in the Ethereum ecosystem (MakerDAO n.d.).8 
DAI’s creator, MakerDAO, achieves ‘stability’ in part by setting a 
‘Target Price’ for the cryptocurrency of USD 1, translating to a 
1:1 USD soft-peg. This relationship is significant as USD is widely 
accepted as the global reserve currency.
It is important to note that DAI can be sold for fiat currency on 
a digital exchange. This high degree of tradability means that 
8	
More information on DAI is available at: https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper/
9	
A full list of NFC Forum members is available at: https://nfc-forum.org/about-us/our-members/
distributing DAI directly to recipients who have not passed KYC 
checks would violate AML regulations. As such the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot distributed DAI ‘wrapped’ in a CCV that could only be 
‘unwrapped’ by pre-approved participants.
To Oxfam’s knowledge, the UnBlocked Cash pilot is the first 
instance of a stablecoin being used in CVA.
3.8. Near-field communication
Near-field Communication (NFC) is a standardised contactless 
communication technology based on a radio frequency (RF) 
field defined and maintained since 2004 by the not-for-profit 
industry association ’NFC Forum’ (Ortiz 2008; NFC Forum n.d.; 
Francis et al n.d.).9 This global consortium of hardware and 
software companies, governments, financial institutions, and 
network-providers works to share development, application, and 
marketing expertise to advance the technology.
The technology uses a base frequency of 13.56 MHz, with a typically 
low data transfer rate or Baud (Bd) of between 106–424 kilobits 
per second (kbit/s). It is designed to exchange data between two 
NFC-compatible devices, or between an NFC-compatible device and 
an NFC-compatible card, tag or token when they are brought within 
close proximity (Ortiz 2008; NFC Forum n.d.). The first scenario, 
which might include two smartphones communicating via NFC, is 
described as an ‘active’ or P2P mode, while the second scenario 
mirrors a more conventional contactless system, sometimes 
described as ‘passive’.
In the Oxfam-Sempo system, the data stored on the NFC-
compatible card could only be modified by an NFC-compatible 
smartphone, which powered the card when held nearby—two 
cards could not interact.
Since the transmission range is so short, approximately four 
centimetres or closer, NFC-based transactions are considered by 
some to be inherently secure (Ortiz 2008). However, Francis et al 
(n.d.) warn that the computational capabilities of smartphones 
coupled with the capabilities of NFC-compatible devices to 
behave as both reader and token does put NFC cards at risk of 
contactless ‘skimming’ and ‘cloning’. With a few exceptions, “… the 
NFC specifications and standards leave application security in the 
hands of the developer” (Francis et al n.d.).

--- Page 18 ---
16    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Figure 10: An NFC card being scanned with an NFC-compatible device. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
Figure 9: An NFC card as distributed to members of the Pango community. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 19 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    17
Figure 11: A QR code printed on the reverse side of an NFC card. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
The NFC cards used during the UnBlocked Cash pilot relied on the 
MIFARE Ultralight EV1 contactless integrated circuit (IC), which 
included a cryptographic module not to be confused with the more 
significant cryptographic process implemented by Sempo.
When the entitlements were loaded onto a card, that amount 
was recorded locally and signed with Sempo’s private key. This 
signing process employed asymmetric key cryptography, which 
allowed anyone with access to Sempo’s public key to verify that 
Sempo deposited the amount recorded on the card.
The entitlements are held on the card as a sequence of 
deposits and withdrawals. Each time a recipient makes a 
purchase, the amount spent is recorded by incrementing a one-
way counter, creating an irreversible record of the total amount 
deducted. Entitlements were added to a separate counter, 
which only Sempo could add value to using its private key. The 
balance of a recipient can then be calculated as: balance = 
[amount loaded on] - [amount deducted]. Since this process 
occurred locally, double-spending was impossible even if the 
ledger had not been synced between vendors.
Each card’s unique identifier (UID) was stored securely and 
could not be tampered with, and was mapped one-to-one 
with a corresponding Ethereum address that was whitelisted 
by the admin account to which all the addresses belong. This 
made the aforementioned ‘skimming’ exceptionally difficult if 
not impossible as only pre-approved addresses could transact 
within the pool.
As a security precaution, the NFC cards were not attributed 
value until they were assigned to a recipient in country; as such 
field staff required a mechanism by which to assign a card’s 
UID to a participant. To this end, quick response (QR) codes 
were printed on the NFC cards, which revealed the cards UID 
used in the aforementioned signing process. This also ensured 
that field staff would not require an NFC-compatible device 
to onboard participants. When onboarding a participant, the 
Sempo platform recorded which UID was assigned to which 
participant and the value of their entitlement.

--- Page 20 ---
18    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Figure 12: A QR code being scanned during recipient registration in Pango. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 21 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    19
4. DLT-based Cash Transfers 
in Vanuatu
UnBlocked Cash system design
The DLT-based CVA deployed in Pango and Mele Maat built on 
Oxfam’s experience with market-based responses in the Pacific 
and the specialised technological expertise of Sempo. At the 
heart of the system was the Sempo platform, which had been 
previously tested in Lebanon, Greece, and Iraqi Kurdistan. The 
UnBlocked Cash pilot introduced untested and novel features 
to the platform in response to the low connectivity in the region 
and government-imposed limitations on cryptocurrencies.
The Sempo platform was composed of five key elements. 
The first was an NFC card issued to all 187 recipients as the 
exclusive means by which to exchange VUV 4,000/AUD 49.24 
per card of tokenised value for goods and services offered by 
approved vendors. Each NFC card was mapped one-to-one with 
an address on the Ethereum mainnet, where the recipient’s 
balance was held—these might otherwise be described as ‘cold’ 
digital wallets. Recipients were encouraged to exhaust their 
assigned value within one week of disbursement. In practice, 
some flexibility was exercised to ensure that all recipients had 
sufficient spending opportunity.
The second element was the Sempo app, which was preinstalled 
onto Android devices provided to each of the 29 vendors. 
These NFC-compatible devices allowed vendors to interact with 
recipients via the NFC cards. A recipient tapped the NFC card 
against the device to complete the desired transaction.
The third was Sempo’s dashboard, which was used by both Oxfam 
and Sempo to register participants, monitor the programme, 
and manage disbursements. In addition to the functions of the 
dashboard, Sempo’s platform verified transactions locally and 
updated a local database before committing transaction records 
to Ethereum. A single account held by Sempo submitted the 
records. This account was authorised to commit transactions on 
the recipient’s behalf during the initial disbursement. The smart 
contract stored this approval notice, and checked to ensure it was 
valid every time Sempo attempted to process a transaction on 
behalf of that user.
The two remaining elements of the system relied on Ethereum. 
First, the flow of value was verified on the mainnet. Second, 
the DAI stablecoin was ‘wrapped’ in a Sempo-developed 
CCV, which was theoretically tradable between community 
members and represented the ‘token’ used to purchase 
goods from local vendors. Given many recipients lacked the 
adequate documentation to pass KYC checks, and the local 
government’s strict regulatory requirements, direct distribution 
of cryptocurrency was not possible. The DAI that underpins the 
Sempo CCV or ‘token’ was only directly accessible by parties that 
met the government’s regulations. These approved parties were 
recorded on a whitelist stored in the smart contract. As a result, 
virtually any party who met local requirements could act as a 
guarantor of value for the programme.
Vendors were encouraged to ‘cash-out’ twice per week via 
direct bank transfers to reimburse their sales. However, this 
was not possible on account of a two-day settlement period 
for each transfer found between banks in Vanuatu. As a 
result of these long bank transfer times, a Super Vendor was 
commissioned to allow smaller vendors to exchange their 
tokenised value currency for fiat currency. The Super Vendor 
was financially incentivised with a cash advance in anticipation 
of the transfer fees they would incur. See section 6.2. ‘Hub-and-
spoke funds flow’ for more information on the Super Vendor.

--- Page 22 ---
20    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
5. Approach and Methods
To determine whether DLTs can reduce the cost and transaction 
time of CVA while improving transparency, security, and overall 
UX, Oxfam partnered with Sempo and ConsenSys Solutions to 
distribute VUV 966,443/AUD 11,896.91 to 187 households of 
non-fungible value from OAU to recipients in Pango and Mele 
Maat on the island of Efate in the Republic of Vanuatu.
Field research conducted by Oxfam staff in Vanuatu has been 
aggregated with data captured from Sempo and ConsenSys 
Solutions to inform a supply chain performance (SCP) 
measurement. This measurement evaluated the pilot against 
three key dimensions: time, cost, and quality.
While for-profit supply chains and humanitarian relief chains differ 
in many ways, Beamon & Balcik (2008, p.5) suggest that: “Effective 
performance measurement systems would assist relief chain 
practitioners in their decisions, help improve the effectiveness and 
efficiency of relief operations, and demonstrate the performance 
of the relief chain, thereby increasing the transparency and 
accountability of disaster response”.
Research activity carried out by Oxfam staff in Vanuatu included 
detailed participant registration and real-time monitoring, 
surveying of the entire participant pool, six key informant 
interviews, and four focus group discussions.
The team collected over 520 surveys across a range of 
activities including:
•	
Preliminary analysis for vendors (prior to the programme 
commencement)
•	
Registration/baseline vendors
•	
Registration/baseline recipients
•	
Onsite monitoring recipients
•	
Post-distribution Monitoring (PDM)/Endline for vendors
•	
Post-distribution Monitoring (PDM)/Endline for recipients
•	
Focus group discussion (FGD)
•	
Key informant interviews (KII)
•	
Internal staff interviews (after the first and the second round)
The extent of the monitoring during the UnBlocked Cash pilot 
is not typical of a humanitarian programme — ordinarily only 
a statistically representative number of randomly sampled 
participants are monitored. Given this pilot was examining 
entirely new technology in this context, it was essential to 
thoroughly observe the communities’ experiences and gather 
feedback from as many participants as possible to catalogue 
their experiences and understanding of the product.
5.1. Expected Research Outcomes
This research set out to deliver the following outcomes:
1.	 Demonstrate the capabilities of the Sempo platform.
2.	 Understand existing transfer mechanisms and the 
associated organisational processes within Oxfam.
3.	 Time and cost comparison of DLT-based solutions with 
existing transfer mechanisms.
4.	 Comparison of stakeholders’ ratings concerning 
transparency, security, and user experience between DLT-
based and existing solutions.
5.	 Develop an understanding of potential risks and mitigation 
measures.
6.	 Develop an understanding of DTL infrastructure and 
deployment consideration.
7.	 Evaluation of platform endpoints, i.e. time and cost of 
distributing and reconciling NFC cards.
Figure 13: Oxfam’s Kalua Salerua, discusses proceedings with Pango community members ahead of registrations for the UnBlocked Cash pilot on 
the island of Efate. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 23 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    21
Figure 14: Local Pango store owner Melika Kaluat at her store during the first round of the UnBlocked Cash pilot in Pango. 
Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
5.2. Research Participants
Participants were engaged in two rounds over four weeks. 
Each round lasted two weeks from participant registration 
to completion. The first round was conducted in the Pango 
community located in the south-eastern part of Efate in the 
Republic of Vanuatu. The second round was conducted in Mele 
Maat, north-west of Bauerfield International Airport.
Since the UnBlocked Cash pilot was not a needs-based 
intervention, the selection criteria for these communities were 
not typical of an Oxfam humanitarian programme. The following 
criteria was used:
1.	 Communities must be based in a location prone to disasters 
but not currently experiencing a disaster.
2.	 Communities must be in close proximity to the Oxfam office.
3.	 Communities must be based in province with a high 
feasibility score based on Vanuatu Cash Transfer Feasibility 
Assessment (2019).
4.	 Communities must be based in an urban or peri-urban 
area in which mobile networks and electricity supply are 
consistent and likely to be rapidly restored after an event.
5.	 Oxfam must have a pre-existing partnership with the local 
government responsible for the community.
These five criteria ensured that the participants were of low 
variability and the pilot could proceed rapidly with maximum 
logistical simplicity. Oxfam had an existing memorandum of 
understanding (MoU) with Shefa Province, in which Pango 
and Mele Maat are based, for the implementation of disaster 
preparedness interventions. According to Holt and Hart (2019), 
10	 The LGBTIQ+ acronym is intended to encompass the full spectrums of sexuality and gender which include but are not limited to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
intersex, and questioning.
Shefa province on the island of Efate is the most feasible 
location for CVA interventions.
Secondary criteria were applied in the selection of recipients to 
ensure that those most likely to be marginalised post-disaster 
were included in the pilot. These include: single mothers, 
widows, people with a disability, and LGBTIQ+ members.10 
Participants were registered in the mornings, based on community 
preference. Initially, both rounds were to be run in immediate 
succession. However, due to a wedding in Mele Maat, Oxfam 
delayed deployment in that community out of respect and also 
to ensure that spending patterns were not affected by the event.
Within these communities, Oxfam defined two participant types: 
Vendors and Recipients.
5.2.1. Vendors
Vendors were existing store owners operating in Pango and Mele 
Maat at a variety of scales, with a varying selection of items. 
Some small vendors stocked a minimal number of items and 
did not necessarily hold a business licence or bank account 
designated explicitly to their business.
Initially, the UnBlocked Cash pilot sought 10 vendors based on 
the minimum number required for a total recipient population of 
200. The total number of vendors increased to 29 based on an 
eligibility survey conducted two weeks before Sempo’s arrival.
Vendors were selected on the basis of where they operated, 
their willingness to participate, bank account ownership, access 
to the internet, and compliance with KYC requirements.

--- Page 24 ---
22    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
It was considered essential to onboard as many vendors as 
possible to ensure recipients have greater freedom of choice. 
Ultimately, 29 were included in the pilot: 15 in the first round 
and 14 in the second. Vendors were 65.5 per cent female with 
an average age of 41. While male vendors averaged 54 years of 
age, the combined average age of the vendors participating was 
44. Further demographic data is provided below:
5.2.2. Recipients
Recipients were represented by 187 heads of households: 101 
in Pango and 86 in Mele Maat; 81.28 per cent of whom identified 
as female. Oxfam intended that only women would be issued 
cards. However, in a country where only 18 per cent of 
households are headed by females, according to 2016 census 
data, this did not necessarily ensure that the most vulnerable 
people were being included.
The same census reported that nationally the average 
household is composed of 4.8 individuals. Meanwhile, the 
combined average of Pango and Mele Maat, determined by 
surveying 157 heads of households, is composed of 5.6 
11	 The number of recipients surveyed for the PDM data set was calculated based on a 5 per cent error margin and 99 per cent confidence level. This calculation was 
made because the activities of the pilot were carried out across two communities at different times. At the time of the calculation, 200 recipients were expected to 
take part, which yielded a recommended sample size of 154. Oxfam staff in Vanuatu conducted three more interviews than required for that number, which resulted in 
a total of 157. With only 187 recipients taking part in the UnBlocked Cash pilot, the sample size became much larger than the 147 required. These calculations were 
made using Raosoft’s ‘Sample size calculator’ available at: http://www.raosoft.com/samplesize.html
individuals.11 As such, it is estimated that the UnBlocked Cash 
pilot directly benefited 1,210 individuals. This estimation was 
made by combining 187 recipients, 29 vendors, and their 
respective families. Further demographic data is provided below:
Access
Count
Percentage
Yes
11
73.33
No
3
20
Not Recorded
1
6.67
SUM
15
100
Table 2: Business Accounts in Pango
Access
Count
Percentage
Yes
14
100
No
0
0
SUM
14
100
Table 3: Business Accounts in Mele Maat
Gender
Count
Percentage
Female
10
66.67
Male
5
33.33
Transgender
0
0
SUM
15
100
Table 4: Vendors by Gender in Pango
Gender
Count
Percentage
Female
11
78.57
Male
3
21.43
Transgender
0
0
SUM
14
100
Table 5: Vendors by Gender in Mele Maat
Gender
Count
Percentage
Female
83
82.18
Male
17
16.83
Transgender
1
0.99
SUM
101
100
Table 6: Recipients by Gender in Pango
Status
Count
Percentage
Single mama
34
33.66
Person with disability
33
32.67
Widows
33
32.67
Transgender
1
0.99
SUM
101
100
Table 7: Recipients by Status in Pango
Figure 15: A member of the Pango community is registered for the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot using KoBoToolbox, which directly interfaced 
with the Sempo platform. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
Gender
Count
Percentage
Female
69
80.23
Male
17
19.77
Transgender
0
0
SUM
86
100
Table 8: Recipients by Gender in Mele Maat
Status
Count
Percentage
Widows
31
36.05
Person with disability
28
32.56
Single mama
27
31.4
Transgender
0
0
SUM
86
100
Table 9: Recipients by Status in Mele Maat

--- Page 25 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    23
Each of the 187 recipients was issued with an NFC card holding 
VUV 4,000 of tokenised value, which on 22 April 2019, the day 
the pilot commenced, exchanged to 49.24 AUD at the mid-
market-rate of 1 VUV = 0.01231 AUD according to XE.
According to the Household Income and Expenditure Survey 
(2010), this amount was not a significant value for social 
support. However, it allowed recipients to make multiple 
purchases, which helped to conduct a more sophisticated test 
of the Sempo platform. Oxfam placed no limitations on how 
recipients could spend the allocated value with the 29 vendors 
onboarded. However, taboo items such as kava, alcohol, 
and cigarettes were defined on the platform to determine if 
recipients would ‘misuse’ the value and to reduce the burden 
of vendors that might have to argue over these items with 
insistent recipients.
Misuse is rare—in a comparison of 11 studies representing 
programmes in eight countries: six in Africa, one in Asia, and 
another in the Middle East, the World Bank found the median 
proportion of households that spent some or all of their 
entitlement on taboo items was 1.2 per cent. While some 
interviewees in a study from Malawi had “heard of four men” 
or knew “certain men” that had spent entitlements on alcohol, 
these numbers appeared very low, which suggests that “… on 
average, there is no positive impact of transfers on alcohol 
expenditures” (Evans and Popova 2014). There was no recorded 
misuse reported in vendor or recipient interviews, or in the 
expenditure data from this pilot.
It is important to note that it was not the intention of the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot to understand temptation spending in 
the target communities, instead to demonstrate that capturing 
such spending patterns in real-time is possible; in contrast to 
relying on post-distribution monitoring (PDM), which does not 
allow NGOs to adapt to this behaviour during the distribution.
5.3. Community Engagement
The involvement of the communities of Pango and Mele Maat was 
essential to the pilot’s success. Through consultation with these 
communities, Oxfam staff in Vanuatu and Sempo were able to 
understand and respond to community attitudes and expectations.
Early survey responses indicated that both communities 
were curious about the UnBlocked Cash pilot and willing to 
participate. Many of the community’s questions during these 
early interviews centred on pilot eligibility criteria, which Oxfam 
staff in Vanuatu determined based on an individual’s reported 
vulnerability, and the type of identifiable information that might 
be associated with the NFC cards. There were also concerns 
regarding the loss of NFC cards and supplied Android devices, 
which triggered a policy change in which vendors agreed to pay 
a penalty if the devices were not returned to Sempo.
Among the most potent examples of community involvement 
were the referrals made by the Area Secretary and the relatives 
of the would-be participants. Approximately 62.76 per cent of 
participants learned about the pilot via non-Oxfam sources.
Note: 12 of the 157 PDM respondents did not answer this question.
Early consultation during recipient registration informed 
the initial product categories programmed into the Sempo 
dashboard, which allowed vendors to contribute to a better 
understanding of the communities’ spending patterns. 
Additionally, Oxfam staff in Vanuatu facilitated ‘inception 
workshops’ to enhance community support.
Following this, Sempo and Oxfam staff in Vanuatu jointly 
facilitated an information session with community leaders 
representing local councils and women’s committees during 
which three people in Pango were elected ‘Community Focal 
Points’. These community members supported the pilot by 
checking the balance of recipients’ NFC cards as required.
Oxfam staff in Vanuatu developed awareness campaigns 
within the communities to encourage participation and provide 
instructions for transactions in-store. Posters describing the 
pilot and instructional material was distributed in the national 
creole language of Bislama. However, the Area Secretary felt 
that Sempo should have offered further instructions on the 
working of the app in the form of a booklet.
The Area Secretary was a notable supporter of the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot. He spoke of his plans to introduce Business Education 
training for local vendors after observing varying competencies in 
bookkeeping, which results in varying degrees of financial success. 
In contrast, he spoke highly of the general financial literacy among 
vendors. His influence and ongoing presence during the pilot 
was a significant factor in the willingness of Pango’s vendors to 
participate in the UnBlocked Cash Pilot.
Type
Count
Percentage
Area Secretary
59
40.69
Oxfam staff
54
37.24
Relatives
28
19.31
Community Focal 
Points
2
1.38
Chief
1
0.69
Other
1
0.69
SUM
145
100
Table 10: Source of Programme Referral

--- Page 26 ---
24    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Figure 16: Pango Area Council Secretary, Alan Sope, during an interview. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 27 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    25
digital wallets managed by sempo
6. Stories
The stories in this section draw on both empirical data and anecdotal evidence collected during the UnBlocked Cash pilot to 
illustrate some of the strengths and weaknesses of the tested system as observed by Oxfam staff in Australia and Vanuatu.
6.1. Complex funds flow
To address government-imposed limitations on the use of cryptocurrency in Vanuatu, Sempo developed a unique distribution model. 
In this design, there were six major steps.
First, the donor or NGO, in this case Oxfam staff in Australia, 
purchased DAI to the equivalent value of the total amount to 
be distributed. In practice, Oxfam staff in Australia engaged 
Sempo to purchase the DAI and distribute the balance of the 
programme to vendors and recipients. This arrangement would 
not be necessary for future implementations if DFAT and Oxfam 
could approve the direct purchase of cryptoassets such as DAI.
In the following step, the DAI was sent to an escrow contract 
where the CCV was created.12 For each unit of DAI deposited into 
escrow, the programme administrator is permitted to distribute 
an equivalent number of CCVs to recipients.
Thirdly, administrators distributed CCVs to recipients on the 
Sempo dashboard. While the holder of each CCV was recorded 
on the Ethereum mainnet, the value could not be exchanged for 
fiat currency. These CCVs were tokens in an accounting process 
managed by the administrator to record debt within the programme.
After the value had been assigned to the recipient address on 
the Ethereum mainnet, which were mapped to an NFC card, 
the recipients exchanged their assigned value for goods and 
services at approved vendors.
12	 Escrow: an agreement between two people or organisations in which money or property is kept by a third person or organisation until a particular condition is met. 
Definition available at: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/escrow
The programme administrator or another approved party such 
as Sempo then reimbursed vendors for the goods and services 
they had exchanged with recipients for tokenised value. This 
cash-out process relied upon Sempo or Oxfam to exchange 
CCV tokens for fiat currency held within their respective bank 
accounts. The actual transfer of funds occurs off-chain 
between existing FSPs held by either Sempo or Oxfam and the 
vendors. This fiat currency was necessary for vendors to trade 
off-chain for goods. At this point, the CCVs were recorded as 
spent, or in possession of an approved party.
Finally, the approved party was reimbursed by using the CCV to 
trigger a release of funds from the escrow contract.
At the expense of complexity, this approach allowed Oxfam, and 
its back donors, to engage with a highly traceable flow of value 
using a recognised cryptoasset, without the cryptoasset being 
distributed in-country.
See section 6.7. ‘DLT-based CVA durability in an urban context 
of Vanuatu’ for additional features of the Sempo platform as 
tested during the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
Figure 17: UnBlocked Cash pilot system design as proposed by Sempo.
Donor
NGO’s 
Smart 
Contract
Affected 
Person
Affected 
Person
Affected 
Person
Vendor
Sempo
Flat
Digital 
Currency
Transfer 
via SMS, Card 
or App
Goods and 
Services

--- Page 28 ---
26    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
6.2. Hub-and-spoke funds flow
The Super Vendor
Among the most significant issues to emerge in the early 
days of the pilot was the slowness of cash-outs from Sempo 
to vendors. Initially, it was expected that cash-outs would 
be made to vendor bank accounts at regular intervals from 
Sempo’s Australian bank account, which held the total amount 
of fund to be distributed. These twice-weekly cash-outs, in 
which tokenised value was exchanged for fiat currency, were 
anticipated to provide adequate liquidity for vendors to restock 
as required during the pilot. To facilitate these transfers, Sempo 
obtained bank details and documentation required for KYC 
compliance during vendor enrolment.
However, the cost of such transfers was unsustainably high 
for Sempo to bear. This method also added unnecessary 
complexity to the system and did nothing to remove incumbent 
intermediaries. During field testing ahead of the pilot, Sempo 
discovered that the minimum allowable amount for international 
transfers from its Australian account was VUV 10,000/AUD 
123.10, which was far higher than the volume of business 
smaller vendors were conducting before needing to restock. 
During vendor registration and surveying, most vendors reported 
an anticipated weekly revenue of between VUV 5,001–10,000/
AUD 61.56–123.10 and not one expected in excess of VUV 
10,000/AUD 123.10, this created an acute problem for the 
liquidity of participating vendors.
Additionally, these international transfers included an entirely 
unacceptable receiver’s fee of VUV 1,000–1,200/AUD 12.31–
14.77, and often took days to process, depending on the 
receiving vendor’s FSP. This delay was considered inconvenient 
for vendors needing to restock during the pilot. This reported 
slowness, in addition to the high fees to both sender and 
receiver, reinforced the assumptions made during the design 
phase of the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
In response to these early difficulties, Sempo and Oxfam staff in 
Vanuatu identified three potential solutions. The first was that 
Sempo would cash-out from a newly established bank account 
based in Vanuatu. The second was to enlist Oxfam staff in both 
Australia and Vanuatu to facilitate the process. Finally, it was 
decided to pursue a hub-and-spoke model by which the hubs, 
called a ‘Super Vendor’, would offer cash-out services to smaller 
vendors. Within the space of roughly two hours, Sempo and 
Oxfam staff in Vanuatu had workshopped the concept, identified 
a candidate based on the vendor’s inventory and liquidity, and 
formalised an agreement with the candidate, a vendor in Pango 
Village. This nimble response illustrated the flexibility of the 
platform and the applicability of this DLT-based CVA solution in 
the context of an emergency response. This flexibility allowed 
the implementing agent to improve its practices incrementally, 
by learning from the outcomes of decisions made during 
previous stages in the programme; in this way, the platform 
promoted an adaptive project management approach.
Figure 18: ‘Super Vendor’ Loid Albert pictured at her store during the first round of the UnBlocked Cash pilot in Pango. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 29 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    27
This model was not without its challenges. During an interview 
with Oxfam staff in Vanuatu, the vendor explained that “it 
took too long to get repaid and I had to use my own money 
to restock”. She went on to say that “I also had to take out 
my own savings to pay out the small vendors…”. She felt that 
there needed to be a clearer understanding that the cash-out 
process will take time, but she appreciated the extra interest 
and financial bonuses with each small vendor cash-out. Her 
incentives included a VUV 30,000/AUD 369.30 advance, in 
anticipation of the demand for cash-out services and the 
transfer fees they would incur. Additionally, she was offered 5 
per cent of the amount cashed-out to small vendors.
While this improved the rate at which smaller vendors could 
restock, this approach compromised the Super Vendor’s user 
experience, as the Sempo app distributed to vendors did not 
delineate between income from product sale and income 
from cash-out services. This distinction between income from 
product sale and income from cash-out services is only visible 
on the dashboard by Oxfam and Sempo staff. The Super Vendor’s 
positive relationship with Oxfam staff in Vanuatu helped bolster 
her confidence in the system and willingness to proceed in her 
role as a Super Vendor despite the app’s limitations.
Due to the lack of clarity surrounding the role of the Super 
Vendor in Pango, in addition to UX challenges and the smaller 
scale of vendors in Mele Maat, Oxfam opted not to retest the 
Super Vendor model in Mele Maat. In its place, Oxfam cashed-out 
vendors once per week from accounts held in Vanuatu to reduce 
the time and direct cost of bank transfer.
When a vendor in Mele Maat was asked if the Super Vendor 
model could have worked in Mele Maat, she answered with an 
emphatic “Yes!”. She felt that the model would have helped 
owners of small and medium shops who were prone to running 
out of goods within 1-2 days to cash-out faster and, therefore, 
restock sooner. Unfortunately, she felt no shop in her community 
was large enough to fulfil the role of a Super Vendor. See 
section 8.4. ‘More Super Vendors for post-disaster scenarios’ for 
potential considerations for future CVA programmes.
Figure 19: Local store owner Melika Kaluat cashes out at ‘Super Vendor’ Loid Albert’s store in Pango. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 30 ---
28    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Figure 20: A small cross-section of goods available at Loid Albert’s store in Pango. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
In the context of an emergency response, the ability to restock 
quickly is crucial. When compared to the conditions of the pilot, 
the inability to meet demand during a crisis has significant 
effects on the health and wellbeing of an affected population. 
65.5 per cent of Vendors reported running out of goods during 
the pilot; of those 78.95 per cent were able to restock. It is 
conceivable that if a solution like that piloted in Pango and Mele 
Maat were to be scaled up in response to a disaster, the rate at 
which stocks depleted might increase with greater demand and 
the ability to restock might be significantly affected.
According to the ‘Vanuatu Cash Transfer Feasibility 
Assessment’, “… smaller markets lack the capacity for CTP 
due to their size and reduced variety of goods. They are then 
unable to scale up quickly in response to a rapid increase in 
demand due to the lack of warehousing and credit agreements 
with suppliers, which reduces shopkeepers’ ability to replenish 
or purchase stock ahead of time. As such, they then have to 
rely on shipments that are subject to regular delays, and may 
need to limit purchase orders and frequency due to the cash 
resources that they have available”. The authors Holt and Hart 
(2019) point out that the inadequate infrastructure at local 
seaports can create further delays due to the increased risk of 
damage to goods during handling.
Therefore, the authors report a considerable risk of inflation 
attributed to CVA in remote locations, particularly where 
significant population movement has occurred. In this context, 
inflation could be attributed to a shortage of supply, which 
drives higher prices or as a consequence of vendors increasing 
prices because they are aware of a majority shift in purchasing 
power regardless of supply.
Despite its drawbacks, support for the Super Vendor solution 
was strong among programme stakeholders. While it lacked 
refinement, this hub-and-spoke model could be developed to 
put more control into the hands of the community to self govern 
and further help to stimulate the local economy. This solution 
could also help unbanked vendors participate in the economy, 
which could be particularly important in emergency response and 
recovery efforts where informal markets are likely to emerge.
6.3. How value is spent
By strict definition, the UnBlocked Cash pilot is a CCT programme 
due to the small pool of 29 vendors with whom recipients could 
transact, and the discouraging of taboo items such as kava, 
alcohol, and cigarettes. These conditions notwithstanding, the 
programme intended to provide as much choice and agency as 
possible within the context.
During recipient registration, Oxfam staff in Vanuatu consulted 
with community members to determine the types of items they 
hoped to purchase during the pilot. The resulting data informed 
the categories programmed into the Sempo platform. These 
included: Food, Household Items, Hygienic Items, Clothes, 
Medical Services, School Fees (added in the second round), 
Transportation Fares, Building Material, Phone Credit, Smart 
Meter Refill, and ‘Other’ for taboo items which included alcohol, 
kava and cigarettes.
Within the Food category, Sempo recorded long-life and fresh 
foods despite the overwhelming bias toward shelf-stable products 
present in the inventory of most vendors, see Figure 20. Later, the 
‘cash-out’ category was added in support of the Super Vendor.

--- Page 31 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    29
Roughly 94 per cent of recipients in Pango and 99 per cent in 
Mele Maat planned to purchase food during the pilot period. In 
both communities, hygienic items were the second most desired 
category, with approximately 62 and 83 per cent of the population 
nominating this category respectively. Both communities 
demonstrated that ‘priority needs’13 and ‘planned purchases’ 
followed the same trend with food, hygienic items, and household 
items holding the first three positions. The remaining categories 
were sorted by percentage in descending order in the tables below.
13	 Priority needs are items a household or individual requires to survive or recover during or following a humanitarian crisis. For this pilot, recipients were asked to 
estimate which categories they considered a ‘priority need’. Planned purchases, on the other hand, relate only to the items the recipients intended to buy in the 
context of the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
Of the 80 recipients in Pango surveyed during PDM, 100 per cent 
purchased food, which represented approximately 40 per cent 
of total purchases in that community. 86.25 per cent bought 
hygienic items, and 43.75 per cent bought household items. 
These figures demonstrate that the recipients’ spending patterns 
roughly matched their reported intentions. In this community, the 
in-country team was surprised to find 6.25 per cent of recipients 
purchased electricity via a smart meter refill. This became the 
fourth largest spending category. The complete list of categories 
is sorted by percentage in descending order in the table below.
Data captured by the Sempo platform indicates that of the 582 
transactions, excluding cash-outs, made in Pango between 
22 April and 17 May 2019, 87.97 per cent contained food items. 
Long-life food represented 59.3 per cent of all items purchases 
in Pango. In contrast to the recipient reported figures, hygienic 
items represented just 15.07 per cent of items purchased 
compared to 34.67 per cent reported. Similarly, household items 
represented just 13.12 per cent of items purchased compared 
to 17.59 per cent reported by recipients.
In Mele Maat between 20 May and 6 June 2019, food items 
appeared in 78.95 per cent of all 708 transactions. As in Pango, 
long-life food was the most dominant item, representing 56.43 
per cent of all items purchased.
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
95
36.82
Hygienic Items
58
22.48
Household Items
37
14.34
Other
21
8.14
Medical Services
16
6.2
Clothes
14
5.43
Phone Credit
7
2.71
School Fees
4
1.55
Transportation Fares
3
1.16
Building Materials
3
1.16
SUM
258
100
Table 11: Priority Needs in Pango
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
86
36.75
Hygienic Items
73
31.2
Household Items
32
13.68
Phone Credit
11
4.7
Clothes
8
3.42
School Fees
8
3.42
Medical Services
7
2.99
Transportation Fares
4
1.71
Other
3
1.28
Building Materials
2
0.85
SUM
234
100
Table 13: Priority Needs in Mele Maat
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
95
39.92
Hygienic Items
63
26.47
Household Items
37
15.55
Medical Services
16
6.72
Clothes
10
4.2
Other
10
4.2
Phone Credit
5
2.1
School Fees
1
0.42
Transportation Fares
1
0.42
Building Materials
0
0
SUM
238
100
Table 12: Planned Purchases in Pango
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
85
36.96
Hygienic Items
71
30.87
Household Items
38
16.52
Phone Credit
12
5.22
Clothes
9
3.91
Medical Services
6
2.61
Other
6
2.61
School Fees
2
0.87
Transportation Fares
1
0.43
Building Materials
0
0
SUM
230
100
Table 14: Planned Purchases in Mele Maat
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
80
40.2
Hygienic Items
69
34.67
Household Items
35
17.59
Smart Meter Refill
5
2.51
Medical Services
4
2.01
Clothes
3
1.51
Phone Credit
3
1.51
School Fees
0
0
Transportation Fares
0
0
Building Materials
0
0
Other
0
0
SUM
199
100
Table 15: Reported Purchases in Pango

--- Page 32 ---
30    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
The influence of item availability on both reported and recorded 
purchases is impossible to conclusively assess without a complete 
inventory from each vendor and a record of where recipients 
transacted. Of the 34 vendors evaluated by Oxfam, 38.24 per cent 
provided a basic inventory. The data presented in the table below 
indicates a bias toward food items, particularly in the long-life 
category followed by hygienic items. In both cases 100 per cent of 
the thirteen vendors stocked items in these categories.
Given the dominance of food items in the inventories of 
surveyed vendors, it is little surprise that vendors report food as 
the most bought items in both Pango and Mele Maat as see in 
the tables below.
Additionally, it is essential to acknowledge that the context of the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot was expected to affect spending patterns, 
when compared with those during an active crisis such as the 
Ambae volcano response. As in the UnBlocked Cash pilot, recipients 
in the post-disaster scenario of Ambae spent the majority of their 
allocation on food items: 32.51 per cent in the first month and 30.72 
per cent in the following (Oxfam 2019). This compares with 40.2 per 
cent in Pango during the UnBlocked Cash pilot. While significant, 
this is also the only similarity between the UnBlocked Cash pilot and 
the Ambae volcano response. It is somewhat unsurprising that in 
the post-disaster scenario, building materials and transportation 
fares were much more critical than during the UnBlocked Cash pilot 
where no money was spent in either of those categories. Clothes 
and medical services were also far more significant in the former 
than in the latter.
Note: Above data was captured during the second PDM of the 
‘Multipurpose Cash Transfer’ to Evacuees from Ambae from 
10–16 January 2019.
Type
Count
Percentage
Long-life Food
522
56.43
Hygienic Items
149
16.11
Household Items
148
16
Fresh Food
50
5.41
Bills
22
2.38
Medicine
17
1.84
Clothing
15
1.62
Taboo
1
0.11
School Fees
1
0.11
SUM
925
100
Table 17: Recorded Purchases in Mele Maat
Type
Count
Percentage
Long-life Food
488
59.3
Hygienic Items
124
15.07
Household Items
108
13.12
Fresh Food
44
5.35
Bills
22
2.67
Clothing
15
1.82
Medicine
14
1.7
Taboo
8
0.97
School Fees
0
0
SUM
823
100
Table 16: Recorded Purchases in Pango
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
13
92.86
School Fees
1
7.14
SUM
14
100
Table 20: Most bought items in Mele Maat
Type
Count
Percentage
Food
13
92.86
Building Materials
1
7.14
SUM
14
100
Table 19: Most bought items in Pango
Type
Percentage 
(Jan)
Percentage 
(Feb)
Combined
Food
32.51
30.72
31.77
Building Materials
7.78
12.9
9.89
Transportation Fares
14.69
11.83
13.51
Savings
5.62
9.83
7.36
Clothes
13.82
8.91
11.79
Medical Services
7.56
5.99
6.91
Gifts
2.7
3.53
3.04
School Fees
1.19
2.92
1.9
Water
5.18
2.46
4.06
Agricultural Inputs
2.38
2.46
2.41
Electricity
1.08
2.3
1.59
Buy Land
1.3
2
1.59
Rent
0.54
1.69
1.01
Recharge Cards
1.73
0.92
1.4
Firewood
0.97
0.92
.0.95
Business Investment
0.65
0.46
0.57
Livestock
0.32
0.15
0.25
SUM
100
100
100
Table 21: Reported Purchases During Ambae Volcano Response
Type
Count
Percentage
Canned Food (fish, tuna, chicken, beef, 
or pork)
13
11.21
Crackers and/or Biscuits
13
11.21
Hygienic Items (soap, or women's 
hygiene products)
13
11.21
Rice
12
10.34
Products for Babies and/or Infants 
(diapers, powder, or formula)
11
9.48
Drinks (bottles or cans, excluding water)
10
8.62
Phone Credit
10
8.62
Bread
7
6.03
Bottled Water
6
5.17
Household Items
6
5.17
Cooked Food
5
4.31
Fresh Food (vegetables and/or fruits)
4
3.45
Kitchen Set
3
2.59
Slippers (shoes)
2
1.72
Clothes
1
0.86
School Materials
0
0
SUM
116
100
Table 18: Stocked items in Pango and Mele Maat

--- Page 33 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    31
From this comparison, it is apparent then when contrasting 
CVA with in-kind support, food distribution provides the most 
relevant comparison. Therefore, it stands to reason that future 
CVA programmes could be optimised for food purchases.
6.3.1. How value was not spent
During on-site monitoring, an elderly widow in Pango commented: 
“It is helpful…” referring to the pilot, “… but if cash was given to me, 
I could go to the market and buy for fresh food”.
This reflection raises an important limitation of the pilot’s 
design. Even with 29 vendors, it was not possible to cater to 
all needs. Many of the foods available in these relatively small 
stores are long-life, shelf-stable, and imported products. Many 
of these items are like those that might be dispatched during 
an emergency response. While this is appropriate in the context 
of this pilot, it illustrated how a closed-loop economy promotes 
inherent conditionality even if it is market-based. By expanding 
the pool of vendors and encouraging product diversity, it is 
conceivable that a ‘true’ economy might emerge.
6.3.2. Transaction details
During the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Sempo distributed VUV 
966,443/AUD 11,896.91 in value by way of 1,572 individual 
transactions. This number is the aggregate of Disbursements, 
Payments, and Withdrawals, which are defined in the follow way:
•	
Disbursement: refers to the NGO or Sempo transferring funds 
to a recipient or vendor digital wallet.
•	
Payment: refers to a recipient making a payment at a vendor, 
or a vendor making a payment at a vendor.
•	
Withdrawal: refers to a vendor requesting a reimbursement 
of digital tokens for fiat.
Note: Discrepancy between value distributed and value spent 
includes payments to vendors who immediately cashed-out 
without recirculating their funds, including their VUV 4000/AUD 
49.24 entitlement, among other vendors.
With a slightly larger number of participants, Pango also 
boasted a larger number of transactions when compared with 
Mele Maat. On average, the pilot participants in Pango made 
75.5 transactions per day with each transaction averaging VUV 
2,286/AUD 28.14 in value. In total VUV 541,602/AUD 6,667.12 was 
distributed across its 101 participants.
The participants in Mele Maat are considered by Sempo to have 
been more comfortable with the platform, evidenced by the 
greater number of lower value exchanges. In this community 
of 86, VUV 424,841/AUD 5,229.79 was spent across 745 
transactions with an average of 106.4 per day. The average 
value per transaction was VUV 1,320/AUD 16.25 or roughly 42.26 
per cent lower than Pango.
Mele Maat notably reports a greater number of withdrawals, 
which may reflect the smaller scale of the vendors in this 
community. Oxfam observed that smaller vendors required more 
liquidity to maintain stock.
6.4. Responding in real-time
6.4.1. Outcomes of transparency
Often when transparency is presented in relation to aid delivery, 
especially where DLTs are concerned, it is presented as a donor 
feature to eliminate misappropriation/misspending or tampering 
of allocated funds. In the case of the World Food Programme 
(WFP) intervention in Jordan, as reported by Reedy (2017), the 
agency “…was immediately able to track and verify the way 
families used these funds”. This feature was also central to 
the UnBlocked Cash pilot, but its greatest strength was not 
verification and oversight, but rather cost savings and support.
The transparency provided by the Sempo platform eliminated 
some of the time-intensive manual checks and balances 
required to comply with KYC, AML, and other donor requirements. 
Additionally, the reconciliation of value occurred in real-time, 
as opposed to the weeks and months reported by Oxfam staff 
in Vanuatu during the Ambae volcano response. “As a result of 
this transparent and efficient reporting, some predict financial 
reporting costs could shrink by 70%.” (Myler 2017).
6.4.2. Responsiveness
Personalised response to unused funds
It is the support that responders could render recipients that 
was most valuable. Rather than merely tracking and verifying 
what recipients were purchasing, the UnBlocked Cash team 
would also consider instances where recipients were failing to 
make purchases. In this way, the team could quickly identify 
if an NFC card had been lost or stolen, or was simply unused 
due to misunderstandings or confusion. While there were 
no instances of either, one recipient reported a stolen card, 
which Sempo was able to trace to a local vendor, based on its 
activity, where it was discovered that the recipient’s sibling had 
used the card. In another case, a woman with a disability had 
appeared not to have used her entitlement by the third day of 
the pilot. When Oxfam staff in Vanuatu identified the anomaly, 
they found that she not only did not understand how to use the 
NFC card, but she had also misplaced it. The team re-issued the 
NFC card and assisted her shopping twice that week.
Type
Amount
Disbursements
196
Payments
619
Withdrawals
12
SUM
827
Table 23: Transaction Breakdown in Pango
Type
Amount
Disbursements
124
Payments
593
Withdrawals
28
SUM
745
Table 24: Transaction Breakdown in Mele Maat
Name
Amount (VUV)
Amount (AUD)
Value Distributed
966,443
11,896.91
Value Spent
816,497
10,051.08
Table 22: Total Value

--- Page 34 ---
32    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
In another case, a card showing no activity was traced to a 
recipient who was unsure of how to access their allocated 
funds. When questioned, the holder confessed that they 
had not completely understood the instructions during the 
onboarding procedure and was too embarrassed to ask for 
clarification. After a quick explanation, the recipient was able 
to use the NFC card as intended hereby unlocking its value. It 
is important to note that this real-time response comes at the 
cost of some degree of privacy, see section 8.14. ‘Addressing 
risks’ for more details.
6.4.3. Efficiency
In traditional CVA, it might have taken weeks for this situation to be 
identified, if at all. In the worse case, this may have resulted in that 
household not receiving the aid to which they were entitled.
It is worth noting that during the PDM surveys, all but one of 
the 157 recipients reported that the solution tested was easier 
than “other forms of assistance” they had experienced. In this 
group, only 16 of these survey respondents felt that they did not 
receive enough support on how to use the NFC card.
However, during on-site monitoring of 120 recipients, 12 
required support with the NFC card. Five were not sure how 
to use the card, another five were afraid to use the card, and 
two were not sure if there was enough value on their card. The 
on-site monitoring revealed that precisely 10 per cent of the 
population reported a problem, while roughly 6 per cent reported 
an issue during the PDM surveys. Neither is insignificant; 
however, it is anticipated that if this same system were to be 
used in these communities again in the context of emergency 
response and recovery effort, the communities’ familiarity would 
mitigate some of the ‘teething’ issues.
6.5. Competing with existing 
technologies and actors
How the system interacts with existing banks
It is sometimes claimed that DLT-based CVA represents a good 
alternative to traditional CVA programmes where ATMs or banks do 
not exist or are not functioning (Smith 2018, p.91). However, like 
traditional CVA programmes which rely heavily on existing FSPs 
and voucher providers, Oxfam observed no disintermediation of 
financial incumbents during the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
Despite this observation, the Sempo platform competed with a 
number of similar platforms that promised to reduce the time 
and costs associated with financial transactions. Oxlabs alone 
evaluated AID:Tech, Disberse, and Everest as potential partners 
while planning the UnBlocked Cash pilot. Of those, Disberse 
presented promising results in its pilot with the START network, 
during which it reported no leakage of value and reduced costs 
(Ibid). Meanwhile, World Vision International helped develop a DLT-
based digital asset transfer platform in Nepal called Sikka, while the 
WFP in Jordan has been providing assistance to refugees in Azraq 
camp using an Ethereum testnet since 2017 (Ibid).
Many of these solutions, including Sempo, rely upon existing 
FSP to hold funds or as foreign exchange providers. Others rely 
on third-party online payment service providers such as Stripe.
Smith (2018) reports that during a CaLP ‘Learning Event’ 
partners, donor, governments, and service providers came 
together to address operational challenges related to cash-
based programming. The author notes that: “In the end, partners 
had to use a variety of delivery mechanisms and rely on direct 
cash distributions through banking service providers and their 
own staff”. Ultimately, direct cash distribution represented 87 
per cent of transfers made during USAID/Food for Peace-funded 
interventions, of which 30 per cent were made via traditional 
banks, compared to just 13 per cent via e-transfers, which are 
defined as a “digital transfer of money or vouchers from the 
implementing agency to a programme participant” (p.16, 130).
This example illustrates the infancy of market-based solutions, 
DLT-based or otherwise, which despite some rhetoric, are still 
tethered to financial incumbents. In Oxfam’s experience, some 
of this tendency toward these well-established methods of 
transferring value relates to the internal struggle with existing 
business processes. Unless the technology can be designed 
to fit the process or the process is adapted to the technology, 
the friction may drive the implementing agency to run ‘belt and 
suspenders’ solutions, which promote inefficiency.
See section 6.2. ‘Hub-and-spoke funds flow’ for details on how 
Sempo and Oxfam modified the tested system in response to 
limitations imposed by existing FSP.
6.6. Hardware delays & failures
To complete a transaction on the Sempo platform, vendors 
must use an NFC-compatible Android device loaded with 
Sempo’s proprietary app. Since mobile phone penetration was 
presumed low in the target communities, Sempo planned to 
distribute their own for the duration of the pilot. No data was 
collected on mobile phone ownership during the first round 
in Pango. Realising the importance of this data, Oxfam staff 
in Vanuatu asked vendors in Mele Maat to report on whether 
they owned a ‘Smart Phone’ or a Feature Phone. Only 28.57 per 
cent of the vendors in that community owned a Smart Phone, 
which reinforced the decision to issue Android devices as a 
component of the platform deployment.
However, as the number of vendors was increased two weeks 
before Sempo deployed in the county, from 10 to 29, Sempo did 
not have a large enough inventory of mobile phones. This change 
was considered appropriate by all stakeholders including Sempo 
to ensure the recipients would not have to alter their behaviour 
significantly when using the cards; i.e. they could continue using 
vendors with whom they already had a relationship.
Additional phones were ordered on 16 April 2019. Despite being 
held in customs, they were available to the team for the scheduled 
programme commencement date of 22 April 2019, on which Sempo 
arrived. This scenario illustrates the low friction setup of the Sempo 
platform and might bode well in a post-disaster scenario.
The most significant hardware issue was not the perceived 
delay, but the unanticipated variation in the supplementary 
devices. Despite sharing the same model designation with 
Ownership
Count
Percentage
Smart Phones
4
28.57
Feature Phones
10
71.43
SUM
14
100
Table 25: Cell/Mobile Phone Ownership in Mele Maat

--- Page 35 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    33
previously tested devices, Sempo unverifiably suggested that 
80 per cent of the HTC M7 that arrived in Vanuatu were installed 
with a different microprocessor to that of the tested model. This 
variation was estimated to increase the login time to the Sempo 
app by 30 seconds.
6.7. DLT-based CVA durability in an 
urban context of Vanuatu
Summary:
•	
Connectivity was not an issue in the first community
•	
Connectivity was poor in the second community
The system deployed for the UnBlocked Cash pilot was a one-
of-a-kind DTL-based solution co-designed by Sempo and Oxfam 
to test such technologies in a low-connectivity environment. 
This is essential for the future of DLTs as a tool for emergency 
response and recovery efforts or as a component of a Disaster 
Risk Reduction (DRR) programme.
Central to this is an NFC card developed by NXP Semiconductors 
with two counters, one which only counts up and the other 
which only counts down. With this configuration, Sempo can 
keep track of spending even when the vendor device is offline. 
It is critical to note that the ‘amount loaded’ counter is only 
editable by Sempo or another trusted party. This mechanism 
prevents recipients from double-spending during network 
outages. When connectivity returns, the vendors’ devices 
sync with the Sempo servers and the Ethereum mainnet. 
This mechanism also allows vendors to confidently accept 
payment from a recipient, knowing that the recipient has money 
to spend.
In practice, Sempo estimated that the system in its current 
design can endure roughly 24 hours of downtime, but added 
that no connectivity was easier for the system to resolve 
than low connectivity. Among other services, the Emergency 
Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) provides voice and data 
connectivity in post-disaster scenarios within 24 hours after 
activation. This service offers basic IEEE 802.11b/g compatible 
WLAN and internet connectivity distributed from a single 
location, where possible using portable high-speed data 
satellite terminals or local broadband links. While this initial 
service may not be suitable to run a system like that offered 
by Sempo, coverage provided by the ETC progressively expands 
over 4–7 days to a point where the requirements of the Sempo 
platform could be met (ETC n.d.).
Since Sempo’s servers run in Docker containers14, it estimates that 
the entire platform could be run without internet connectivity if the 
community was connected to a central server using long-range 
mesh or an ad-hoc network on an array of WIFI hotspots distributed 
for the intervention. It should be noted that in this scenario, some 
of the benefits of the system would not be available in real-time. 
In particular, Sempo’s co-founder suggested that “… a lack of 
connectivity made responding to problems slower”.
14	 “A container is a standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing 
environment to another. A Docker container image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an 
application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries and settings”. More information on Docker available at: https://www.docker.com/
During the second round in Mele Maat, the system’s resilience 
was put to the test when Telecom Vanuatu Limited (TVL) 
announced scheduled maintenance in the area, which would 
guarantee internet outages over the opening weekend.
The internet connection became extremely slow, which 
prevented Sempo’s devices from synchronising. Sempo reported 
that some vendors called the support hotline and asked “why 
does the transaction say it is pending?”. When the situation was 
explained and the vendors were reassured that the transactions 
were still valid, they replied, “oh, okay that’s fine”.
Three days later, Sempo still had not seen some devices 
synchronise. Since this was the first extended test of the offline 
mode in a non-simulated environment, Sempo was not sure if 
these few unsynchronised devices were suffering from poor 
connectivity or bugs in the system. Regardless, Sempo was 
ultimately pleased with the performance of the platform.
6.8. The indispensable expert
A single point of failure
A key component of Sempo’s ideology is acknowledging the 
“unknown unknowns”. Sempo insists that the solution it deploys 
must be tailored to the particular context in which its platform 
is assigned to operate. Many of the novel solutions tested 
during the UnBlocked Cash pilot, such as the NFC card for offline 
transactions and the CCV ‘wrapped’ stablecoin, have never been 
tested in a humanitarian context in the Pacific or elsewhere.
A consequence of these complexities was Oxfam’s immense 
dependence on Sempo’s core staff, who travelled to Vanuatu 
for the duration of the pilot. The co-founder turned out to be 
an indispensable asset for even the smallest technical support 
queries. One Oxfam staff member based in Vanuatu anecdotally 
estimated that the co-founder was the only person able to solve 
the problem at hand in all but a few occasions. When asked if Oxfam 
staff could be trained to respond to these issues they replied, “Yes, 
but we didn’t know what they would be until they emerged”.
Unless Oxfam staff are indeed able to respond to hardware 
and software issues in-country without Sempo support, this 
indispensable expert represents a single point of failure, 
and, therefore, a significant risk for future implementations. 
It also restricts the scalability of the platform to a number of 
participants within an area that a single expert can service.
One Oxfam staff member in Vanuatu reported that, among 
other things, the Sempo co-founder added additional spending 
categories to the dashboard, addressed transaction lag due in 
part to TVL’s scheduled maintenance in Mele Maat, and fixed a 
bug that produced duplicate transactions.
Despite this, Sempo claimed that no technical changes, 
including project-responsive code, were made during the 
second round in Mele Maat.

--- Page 36 ---
34    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Figure 21: Pango village, Vanuatu: Catharine Patunvanu, Oxfam Staff, describes the registration process to a recipient. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 37 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    35
7. Analysis of the Data 
Informed by the Stories
7.1. Time
Linear time, measured in seconds, minutes, and hours, is a 
significant marker of operational efficiency.
The UnBlocked Cash pilot was an opportunity to evaluate whether 
DLT-based CVA via Sempo’s platform could deliver humanitarian 
aid faster than in-kind support or conventional CVA programmes. 
Initially, the project was concerned with the end-to-end speed of 
aid delivery from a donor in Australia to a recipient in Vanuatu. Due 
to human resources constraints in Vanuatu, the research objective 
focus shifted to onboarding time.
This study is not concerned with the set-up time of the Sempo 
platform. As this product matures, the set-up is expected to 
simplify and quicken. To compare like scenarios, this study 
assumes both the banking system and the DLT-based applications 
are operational in a disaster-affected site at the time of transfer. 
In this scenario, we expect DLT-based CVA will deliver support in a 
more timely manner than by traditional means.
That data collected during the UnBlocked Cash pilot is sufficient 
to make partial claims against the hypothesis. However, Oxfam 
cannot unconditionally claim that the system tested during the 
pilot is unconditionally faster than other CVA programmes.
7.1.1. Baseline time
When considering the time it takes for funds to be transferred 
from donor to recipient, Oxfam considered two factors: banking 
time and internal processing time.
The amount of time it takes for a value to be credited to Oxfam’s 
Australian bank accounts varies depending on when a donation is 
made. Donations made on a weekday before 6PM are credited on 
the same day, while those made after that time are processed the 
following working day. Meanwhile, bulk transfers from Australia take 
roughly 1.3 working days to be received by Vanuatu.
Taking into account these typical processing times, Oxfam 
assumes the transfer takes an average of two working days 
from an Australian donor to Oxfam’s bank accounts in Vanuatu, 
excluding internal processing time. As a proxy for the time 
required to transfer back donor funds to a country office, this 
report draws on Oxfam’s internal processing time for monthly 
bulk transfers in Australia and Vanuatu in addition to the 
‘processing’ time incurred by the Oxfam’s FSPs. While these 
bulk transfers are only used for salaries and, therefore, not 
relevant to an emergency response or recovery effort, Oxfam’s 
Pacific Cash and Livelihoods Lead suggests that for CVA, bulk 
transfers should be adopted as they are more efficient and less 
costly. According to research conducted by OxLabs, the FSPs 
processing time is relatively efficient; most bulk transfers are 
completed on the same day or within 1–2 working days.
By contrast, the Oxfam accounts team typically took 5.6 working 
days to process a transfer. At worst, the process could take 12 
working days. One explanation for this delay is the tendency for 
the accounts team to process monthly bulk transfers during 
the first week of that month. This process was developed to 
mitigate accounting issues that arise if it is processed earlier. 
Even if the bulk transfer request form is passed to the accounts 
team one month earlier than the approved transfer date, it is 
not processed until the month of. An alternative explanation is 
that the finance department based in Vanuatu enforces a policy 
of only three payment days per week: Monday, Wednesday, and 
Friday. As such, a payment prepared on Tuesday or Thursday 
would be delayed by one day. However, in the context of an 
emergency response, neither situation would apply as alternate 
policies are put into place during emergencies.
For the purpose of this report, the total time for funds to 
transfer from an Australian donor to a Ni-Vanuatu recipient 
is 7.3–8.3 working days, excluding internal processing. See 
section 8.11.2. ‘More comprehensive baseline studies’ for 
recommendations regarding the limitations of the baseline data 
presented in this section.
7.1.2. Response Time
In Vanuatu, “communities reported that the average wait time for 
disaster assistance was 21 days after impact” (Holt and Hart 2019).
However, the authors report some inconsistencies in the collective 
memory of the households, “with answers ranging from one week 
to more than four weeks for the same location”. Subsequently Hart 
notes that variations in reports “… may be due to the fact that the 
distribution and access to assistance for households also tends to 
be inconsistent, i.e. households close to a main road may receive 
assistance while those living away from the road may not; male 
headed households are more likely to receive assistance than 
female-headed households; households with a family affiliation 
with the local chief or government representative are also more 
likely to receive assistance”.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that these inconsistencies are 
an exception—the data collected sufficiently demonstrates the 
21-day average waiting period to receive assistance in Vanuatu.
7.1.3. Onboarding Time
Oxfam’s Pacific Cash and Livelihoods Lead equated the 
onboarding process of the UnBlocked Cash pilot with 
the registration and distribution process of a typical CVA 
programme. During registration, Oxfam records an individual’s 
information and issues a record of their entitlement. The 
entitlement is typically made available on a subsequent day.
By their estimation, registration takes a “minimum of 10–15 
minutes”, usually after waiting in line and the same again 

--- Page 38 ---
36    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
on a following day to receive an entitlement in the form of a 
cheque or voucher. This process incurs a heavy travel burden 
on recipients who must make at minimum two trips to receive 
their entitlement. By combining registration and distribution, 
which on aggregate costs a recipient between 20–30 minutes in 
addition to the time required to make two trips, the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot was considerably more time-efficient.
Additionally, the KoBoToolbox integration offered by the Sempo 
platform allowed Oxfam staff in Vanuatu, already trained in the 
use of this tool, to move around the target community registering 
programme participants into a database that directly linked to the 
system of tracking entitlements. This eliminates the time typically 
required to transfer registration data from one platform to the other. 
See section 7.5.2. ‘Integrations’ for more information.
Theoretically, additional entitlements could be distributed 
remotely, which eliminates the need for the recipient to collect 
an additional cheque or voucher. The recipient could exchange 
their assigned value immediately, which represented another 
significant efficiency gain.
It is important to note that during an emergency response, 
Oxfam staff do not record onboarding time in the same way as 
it was recorded for the UnBlocked Cash pilot. Full onboarding to 
an existing CVA platform during the Ambae volcano emergency 
response from the identification and registration of individuals 
to recording and verification of beneficiary data and distribution 
took place over 2–3 dates.
The following information is an approximation of this process 
based on the operational experience of Oxfam’s Pacific Cash 
and Livelihoods Lead. They note that these figures are the 
minimum time required per recipient during the Ambae volcano 
response. Meanwhile, the entire process of registration to 
distribution for Oxfam is typically much longer.
Note: If a recipient does not have a valid ID—40 per cent of 
individuals did not—they are sent to have a picture taken and 
have a card printed, which takes 5 and 10 minutes respectively, 
15 minutes in total.
Note: If a recipient does not have a valid ID, an additional 5 
minutes is added to the process to accommodate the time of an 
Oxfam staff member to find and issue an ID card.
During the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Oxfam staff in Vanuatu timed 
onboarding of vendors and recipients in Pango and Mele Maat. 
By comparing the average time of these groups between 
rounds, the team was able to estimate their staff performance. 
It is assumed that the lower average time in the second group is 
due to greater familiarity with the process on the part of Oxfam 
staff in Vanuatu and not some other conflating factor.
Vendor onboarding was 5.88 per cent faster in Mele Maat, while 
recipient onboarding was an astonishing 33.33 per cent faster. 
The average time of each round are documented below in 
fractions of a minute:
Activity
Time (mins)
Description
Site Set-up
Division of lines and desks according 
to area council of origin: east, west, 
south, north Ambae.
Community 
Awareness 
Presentations
20
Located at the registration site.
Line-up for 
Registration
20
 Registration
10
Individual provides name, existing ID, 
and testimony from another member 
of the same household that the 
family agrees to the individual being 
designated as beneficiary. A registration 
slip is provided at this stage.
Post-
Registration
This step is not included in the 
estimated one-hour wait time for an 
individual recipient and not required 
when using the Sempo platform.
Download Data 
from Database
5
Download collected data from 
SurveyCTO.
Verify List
45
The database is verified by chiefs from 
each area council.
Remove 
Duplicates
60
The database is cross-checked in 
Excel for duplicates.
Table 26: Registration Day
Activity
Time (mins)
Description
Site Set-up
Division of lines and desks according 
to area council of origin: east, west, 
south, north Ambae
Community 
Awareness 
Presentations
20
Located at the registration site.
Line-up for 
Registration
20
Present ID & 
Registration 
Slip
10
Identify 
Cheque
The recipient's name is checked 
against the distribution list and the 
family ID number is written on the 
registration slip. The recipient's 
name is crossed off the list and the 
corresponding cheque is identified.
Issue Cheque
The cheque is issued in a plastic 
sleeve with registration slip and ID.
Cash-out 
Cheque
20
The recipient visits a bank to cash-out 
their entitlement. 
SUM
70
Table 27: Distribution Day
Activity
Time (mins)
Description
Generate 
Family ID
5
Family ID numbers are generated in 
Excel for all registered individuals.
Filter List for 
Eligibility
15
The database is filtered according 
to eligibility criteria: evacuee (VUV 
17,000/AUD 209.27) or host family (VUV 
7,000/AUD 86.17), and entitlement is 
added to the list.
Divide List
60
The database is divided according to 
the recipient's financial service provider, 
residents, and distribution site.
Schedule 
Distribution
120
Distribution schedule is created.
Print
45
Final distribution lists printed 
according to schedule.
SUM
405
Table 26: Registration Day (continued)

--- Page 39 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    37
Additionally, the KYC process was also timed; here too a 
significant efficiency gain was observed: 10.7 per cent faster 
in the second round when compared to the first. Oxfam 
acknowledged the possibility of a ‘learning effect’ in these 
figures, so it crucial that both rounds be considered especially 
in regards to the KYC processing time.
Oxfam’s Pacific Cash and Livelihoods Lead noted that while 
vendors were slower to onboard than recipients during the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot, they are also issued with entitlement and, 
therefore, are concurrently being registered as both vendors 
and ‘recipients’.
On average, vendors were onboarded in 8.25 minutes per business 
owner, while recipients took just 4.5 minutes per person.
While this staff member’s experience during the Ambae volcano 
response—as outlined above in the Registration Day and 
Distribution Day estimations—cannot be directly compared 
with the UnBlocked Cash pilot, it serves as a potent example 
of the time-intensive nature of existing CVA processes. Many 
incremental improvements could be made to such processes to 
make significant efficiency gains. Many of Sempo’s time-saving 
features are independent of the underpinning DLT and are, 
therefore, easily replicable. Based on the information presented 
in this section, it is impossible to say a DLT-based solution is 
more timely than a non-DLT-based solution. However, it is clear 
that a well-designed platform, such as Sempo’s, can indeed 
save staff time, which in turn reduces operational costs.
7.2. Cost
Cost is a significant performance metric in light of an 
increasingly competitive funding landscape and greater scrutiny 
from donors.
The UnBlocked Cash pilot set out to capture transaction and 
set-up fees associated with the Sempo platform in addition to 
ongoing programming and operational cost incurred by Oxfam. 
The former are identified as ‘direct costs’ in the report, while the 
latter are referred to as ‘indirect costs’.
It is presumed that the set-up costs of the technology 
underpinning the UnBlocked Cash pilot relative to the sum being 
transferred would negatively affect the cost dimension of this 
study. However, due to Sempo’s relatively immature business 
model, Oxfam cannot conclusively comment on the set-up costs 
associated with the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
Even so, it might be assumed that cost savings would likely be 
much more significant if set-up expenses were not amortised 
into the programme. When measuring the cost of a market-
based programme backed by existing FSP, one does not typically 
factor the cost of setting up the banking system which has 
been amortised across countless transactions over many years.
As with the previous dimension, see section 7.1. ‘Time’, Oxfam 
cannot unreservedly claim to have tested a comparatively 
more cost-effective solution during the UnBlocked Cash pilot. 
Data indicates that the tested system required significantly 
fewer human resources than previous CVA programmes tested 
in Vanuatu. This suggests that the indirect costs of the pilot 
should also be significantly lower. Direct costs on the other 
hand are lower only if on-chain activities are considered. 
Otherwise, many of the costs associated with transferring fiat 
currency between incumbent FSPs remain the same.
7.2.1. Baseline costs
When considering indirect costs, the most significant 
contributor is the cost of salaries of both existing staff and 
additional personnel required for reconciliation. During the 
Ambae volcano response in 2018, reconciliation required the 
support of an external accounting firm at the approximate cost 
of VUV 6,000,000/AUD 73,860 to account for the approximately 
VUV 98,000,000/AUD 1,206,380 transferred, against a total 
operational cost of AUD 1,985,987. This was in addition to an 
estimated four finance staff with an approximate salary of 
VUV 236,000/AUD 2,905.16 per month. Given the operational 
efficiency observed during the UnBlocked Cash pilot, it is 
presumed that indirect cost savings were significant to the 
point that even a slight increase in direct costs would be moot.
For direct costs, Oxfam considered four different scenarios to 
establish a baseline; these were:
•	
Donors transferring funds to Oxfam Australia (OAU)
•	
Oxfam Australia (OAU) transferring to Oxfam in Vanuatu (OiV)
•	
Oxfam in Vanuatu (OiV) transferring to partners
•	
Partners transferring to beneficiaries or other partners
The cost of transferring funds across a range of FSPs are 
summarised in the table below.
Location
Recipients
Vendors
KYC
Pango (first round)
5.4
8.5
5.6
Mele Maat (second round)
3.6
8
5
AVERAGE
4.5
8.25
5.3
Table 28: Onboarding Time (mins)
Transaction
Cost to send 
(Westpac)
Cost to send 
(Western 
Union)
Cost to send 
(ANZ)
Cost to 
receive 
(Average)
Cost to 
receive 
(ANZ)
Cost to 
receive 
(Bred Bank)
Cost to 
receive 
(NBV)
Cost to 
receive 
(BSP)
Donors to OAU
$0.50
OAU to OiV
$15.00
$0.00
VUV 1,200
OiV to Partner
VUV 20
VUV 0
$0.00
Partners (or OiV) to 
Recipients
VUV 20
VUV 75
$0.00
VUV 150
VUV 100
VUV 30
AVERAGE
$7.75
$0.00
VUV 20
VUV 425
$0.00
VUV 150
VUV 100
VUV 30
Table 29: Transfer Costs Compared

--- Page 40 ---
38    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
On average, it costs Oxfam AUD 0.50 to transfer funds within 
Australia; it is, therefore, presumed that the same is true for a 
back donor. Meanwhile, in Vanuatu, it costs Oxfam VUV 20/AUD 
0.25 to transfer funds to a partner, and the same amount for a 
partner to transfer funds to a recipient. Therefore, a transaction 
that leaps from Oxfam’s accounts in Vanuatu to a partner and 
on to a recipient incurs a total cost of VUV 40/AUD 0.50. Given 
the average cost to recipients to receive funds equates to VUV 
93.33/AUD 1.15, the total cost of transactions in Vanuatu alone 
can amount to VUV 133.33/AUD 1.64. 
One of Oxfam’s goal for the UnBlocked Cash pilot was to reduce the 
overall cost of transactions, but most importantly eliminate the 
cost to recipients entirely; therefore, Oxfam bears all receiver costs.
(0.50+15)+((20+20+93.33)*0.01231)=17.14
From the figures above, it is estimated that to complete a chain of 
transaction from an Australian donor to recipient in Vanuatu, Oxfam 
would incurred transfer fees amounting to VUV 1,392.36/AUD 17.14.
15	 SendMoneyPacific’s most current data on transfers between Australia and Vanuatu is available at: https://www.sendmoneypacific.org/compare/list/200/australia-
to-vanuatu.html
7.2.2. Sempo costs
Based on data from SendMoneyPacific15 Oxfam’s Australian FSP, 
Westpac, charges a fee of AUD 10 for an account-to-account 
transfer that takes 3–5 days to process. Under some conditions, 
the fee can exceed AUD 20, but receivers are never charged. 
In contrast, Western Union charges between AUD 2.90–35 
depending on the transfer method. Given the higher exchange 
margins, Western Union can cost the sender upwards of AUD 56 
in some instances. In the best case, SendMoneyPacific reports 
that a transfer of AUD 200 via Westpac attracts a 10 per cent 
fee, while Western Union attracts just 4.77 per cent.
In contrast to both, the average cost of an individual 
transaction on the Ethereum mainnet during April and May, 
according to Etherscan, was just ETH 0.04, which equates to 
USD 0.12 during the same period. Based on the mid-market-
rate according reported by XE on 22 April 2019, the day the pilot 
commenced, each transaction on the mainnet can be said to 
have a direct cost of roughly AUD 0.17.
7.2.3. Total direct cost estimation
Figure 23: The flow of value relative to the flow of funds and the associated direct costs incurred by FSPs during the second round of the pilot in Mele 
Maat in which the Super Vendor was removed.
Figure 22: The flow of value relative to the flow of funds and the associated direct costs incurred by FSPs during the first round of the pilot in Pango in 
which the Super Vendor was tested.
DFAT
OIV
OAU
Beneficiaries
Sempo
SuperVendor
Vendors
0.5
AUD 0.50
Estimated Time 
(days)
Estimated Cost
Value Flow
Funds Flow
0.5
AUD 0.50
1.3
AUD 15.00
VUV 1200
UNKNOWN

VUV 20
2.3
AUD 16.00
VUV 1200
DFAT
OIV
OAU
Beneficiaries
Sempo
Vendors
Estimated Time 
(days)
Estimated Cost
0.5
AUD 0.50
Value Flow
Funds Flow
0.5
AUD 0.50
1.3
AUD 15.00
VUV 1200
2.3
AUD 16.00
VUV 1200

--- Page 41 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    39
By combining the findings from section 7.2.1. ‘Baseline costs’ 
and section 7.2.2. ‘Sempo costs’, it is possible to estimate 
the total direct cost of a transaction during the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot. Figures 22 and 23 represent the estimated cost of 
transactions for the Unblocked Cash pilot in both rounds.
The following equation represents the direct cost to complete 
a chain of transactions from a donor in Australia to a recipient 
in Vanuatu in addition to cashing out a vendor during the first 
round of the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
(0.50+0.50+15)+5*0.17=16.85
Note: In addition to this direct cost, the Super Vendor was 
offered 5 per cent of the amount cashed-out to small vendors. 
Also, this equation assumes a cash-based exchange between 
the Super Vendor and the vendor, which incurs no charge.
The following equation represents the direct cost to complete a 
chain of transactions from a donor in Australia to a recipient in 
Vanuatu in addition to cashing out a vendor in the second round 
of the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
((0.50+15)+((20+93.33)*0.01231))+3*0.17=17.40
At best, the direct costs of the tested system was 1.69 per cent 
lower than a traditional series of transfers; at worse, the tested 
system was 1.52 per cent more costly.
7.3. Transparency
7.3.1. Platform Transparency
Oxfam observed three critical layers to the transparency of the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot, which was defined as the state in which 
everything is apparent and accessible.
16	 More information on Etherscan is available at: https://etherscan.io
The first is the Sempo dashboard, which allowed programme 
stakeholders to watch transactions in real-time provided 
vendors had internet connectivity at that moment. The 
dashboard was anecdotally praised by Oxfam staff; however, 
some staff who had not been formally onboarded complained 
that the terms ‘Payment’, ‘Disbursement’ and ‘Withdrawal’ were 
not immediately clear.
During PDM with Oxfam staff in Vanuatu, 60 per cent, or three out 
of five, felt that learning to use and understand the dashboard 
was their most difficult task during the first round. In the second 
round, one of these staff members continued to feel this way. In 
an interview with one staff member, it was suggested that some 
of these difficulties might have stemmed from the lack of time 
dedicated to fully exploring the dashboard during training.
This tool was not available to everyone from the outset as the 
Sempo dashboard requires login credentials composed of a 
username and password. Stakeholders and staff were granted 
permissioned access at the discretion of Oxfam’s Pacific Cash 
and Livelihoods Lead and project manager in-country. Every one 
of the aforementioned staff members stated that the reason 
they found the dashboard so difficult to understand is that they 
either had no access or very limited access to it. Therefore, it is 
arguable that the information provided via the dashboard was 
not sufficiently accessible. Figure 24 shows the landing page of 
the Sempo dashboard as seen by a user with ‘view’ permission.
Given the transaction records were stored on the Ethereum 
mainnet, technologically savvy stakeholders could follow the pilot 
using an aggregator like Etherscan.16 This makes a great deal of 
pilot data highly accessible, but it is not expected to be apparent 
to those without a good understanding of Ethereum or DLTs.
Figure 24: Oxfam Australia’s view of the Sempo dashboard captured at 12:55pm on 10/05/2019.

--- Page 42 ---
40    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Finally, there is the attitude of UnBlocked Cash pilot participants. 
The position of Sempo, in particular, tended towards presenting 
apparent and accessible information so long as it did not 
threaten its business interests. This is perhaps the most 
important feature as merely making information available ‘on-
chain’ does not guarantee transparency for all parties. If the 
transparency is to serve everyone, all observations must be 
allowed to flow freely without pretence or deceit, and presented 
in a readily understandable form. Since DLTs are inherently 
complex and require a high degree of technological literacy, an 
asymmetric power relationship emerges between participants of 
a DLT-based intervention. Humanitarians should not assume that 
the mere existence of open information is sufficient.
Recipients were at a particular disadvantage, exemplified by one 
recipient who was afraid there might not be any funds on their NFC 
card. This illustrates that sometimes, information must be actively 
shared rather than simply made available to be truly transparent. 
The onboarding process could be modified to include an 
opportunity to check one’s balance or make a dummy transaction.
This anxiety was present despite the Community Focal Points in 
Pango, whose role was to check the balance of recipients’ NFC 
cards as required. These community members were issued with 
phones and announced to the community as points where one’s 
balance could be checked without completing a transaction 
with a vendor. Although these roles were allocated, Oxfam 
staff in Vanuatu felt that more time should have been taken to 
ensure Community Focal Points were playing a more active role 
in the pilot and that recipients were regularly reminded to check 
their balances with them.
During the pre-pilot training, most recipients had the 
opportunity to make a dummy transaction using a test card, 
rather than their own. A small number were able to make a small 
VUV 1/AUD 0.012 transaction using their own card.
In Mele Maat, Oxfam and Sempo staff were appointed as 
‘touchpoints’ to ensure that every recipient had the opportunity 
to see the balance of their NFC card. Previously, Sempo was 
not certain that this process would improve confidence in the 
system among recipients.
7.4. Security
7.4.1. Personal Security
During the pilot there were no known instances of theft, 
violence, or other behaviour that might have threatened the 
safety of participants. During the PDM, all but four of the 157 
recipients surveyed—which equates to 97.45 per cent of the 
population—communicated that they felt safe using the NFC 
card, and all but five felt safe with their information being 
stored. It is worth noting that only 39.47 per cent of those 96.81 
per cent reported knowing what information was being stored. 
All those who knew what data was being stored, felt safe.
No personally identifiable information was stored on the NFC 
cards; they only carried the amount loaded, the amount spent, 
Sempo’s cryptographic signature for verification, and the UID. 
Personal data was stored in a central off-chain database that 
included: name, age, gender, location, eligibility status, and 
participant type, i.e. vendor or recipient.
For vendors, Sempo stored bank account details and a passport 
or driver’s licence photo for KYC compliance. These details will 
be held for seven years and are not accessible to Oxfam.
It should be noted that Oxfam informed each participant of the 
information that would be collected for the pilot at the time 
of onboarding.
7.4.2. Cyber Security
Sempo stored four types of data between Amazon Web Services 
(AWS) infrastructure and the Ethereum mainnet, these are:
•	
Application Source Code
•	
Application Access Keys
•	
Database Contents
•	
Blockchain Transaction Records
The two major security risks for any digital service provider are a 
loss of data and unauthorised access. Much of the way Sempo 
manages these issues is private information; however, an Oxfam 
review of the technical documents revealed that Sempo takes 
these matters seriously.
Furthermore, there was no evidence of unauthorised access 
to the system, according to Sempo platform logs. The logs 
Figure 25: Public view of UnBlocked Cash transactions via Etherscan 
captured at 12:56pm on 10/05/2019.

--- Page 43 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    41
recorded a small number of attempts to connect to Sempo’s 
servers from unfamiliar Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. 
Sempo describes these attempts as the equivalent of turning 
a doorknob to see if the door will open. While these failed 
attempts do not constitute a real threat, they nonetheless 
illustrate Sempo’s due diligence.
7.5. User Experience
In this section, Oxfam is concerned with the quality of all 
interactions between recipients, vendors, operational staff, and 
the Sempo platform. This includes but is not limited to onboarding, 
troubleshooting, transferring value and redeeming value.
This study’s examination of UX abides to the Norman & Nielsen (n.d.) 
definition of usability as a quality attribute of the user interface (UI). 
Unlike UX, which captures all components of a user’s journey with a 
product or service, usability is only concerned with the experience 
within a product’s interface. Usability is a measure of intuitiveness, 
pleasantness, and efficiency.
Based on participant feedback, support for the solution trialled 
during the UnBlocked Cash pilot was immensely high. 100 per cent 
of the 157 participants questioned during the pilot reported that 
their overall experience of the NFC card was positive; and all but 
one felt it was easier to use than other forms of assistance. Only 
two of the participants surveyed in this group claimed to have had 
an issue with the NFC card, which they reported to Oxfam staff in 
Vanuatu at the time of the incident.
Meanwhile, during onsite monitoring of 120 participants, 40 
chose to describe the system as ‘easy’ or ‘very easy’; of those, 
19 also described it as ‘fast’ or ‘quick’.
Three recipients in this pool commented on their initial 
experiences with the system, stating that:
“The first time that I have been shopping, I was afraid that there 
was no money on the e-voucher, but after the first time I think it 
was just easy.”
“The first time I used the system, it was not really flexible, but 
the second time I felt it was very easy. It has helped us all in the 
community, especially me as a single mama.”
“At first, when I started using the card, I feel scared because 
that was my first time using it. But after sometimes, I feel 
shopping was very easy. Also, I do not need to travel long 
distances to go to the shops.”
The three recipients quoted above demonstrated that after their 
encounter with the system, they were very satisfied, each then 
going on to join the 40 others who commented on the platform’s 
ease of use. Furthermore, 100 per cent of the PDM group 
nominated to receive an e-voucher—in this case, represented 
by the NFC card—in place of other assistance when they were 
asked to consider the next time a disaster strikes.
Unfortunately, due to a limitation of how data was collected, it 
is not possible to determine if the people having these positive 
experiences are in the unbanked category. If that were true, 
their fears and doubts concerning the solution tested might 
be related to their prior experiences being limited to the use 
of cash, whereas others who had used cards of one form or 
another might have felt otherwise. Presumably, the majority of 
the pilot’s participants had no understanding of cryptocurrency, 
so it is conceivable that many fears and doubts may be 
associate to the newness of the technology. See section 8.11. 
‘Addressing research limitations’ for more information regarding 
the limitations of this study.
7.5.1. User Interface
There are two elements of the Sempo platform to consider when 
interrogating the UI. The first is a browser-based dashboard with 
a public-facing Uniform Resource Locator (URL), the second is 
the Android app.
While each user group engaged with the Sempo UI, recipients 
primarily interacted with the platform by tapping their assigned 
NFC card and verifying purchases by glancing at the Sempo app 
Figure 26: Sammy Kalmer, the owner of Pam Store, reviews transactions on the Sempo app. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 44 ---
42    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
on devices held in the vendor’s hands. As such, this section will 
evaluate the experience of the vendors and Oxfam staff.
Vendors were the primary user of the Sempo app, which was 
installed on an NFC-compatible device to facilitate in-person 
transactions between vendors and recipients. The app also 
provided vendors with a record of their transactions, see Figure 
26, and the ability to cash-out their accumulated value into fiat 
currency, see Figure 27. The cash-out feature was referred to as 
a ‘withdrawal’ within the app UI.
The receiver of the CCV entered the amount owed in VUV on a 
three-by-four numeric keypad; the value was rendered above 
the keypad as if on a calculator, see Figure 27. The receiver of 
goods was asked to verify the amount before the transaction 
was confirmed with the press of a button, see Figure 30.
The same three-by-four numeric keypad was used for logging into 
the app by way of a personal identification number (PIN). Given 
the limited experience among vendors with smartphones, some 
struggled with this process. Ultimately, the inability to log in was 
not the result of the app UI, but rather to connectivity issues, or 
the vendor having created and subsequently forgotten their PIN.
Figure 27: Amount owed being entered in a transaction between and Melika Kaluat (Vendor) and Loid Albert (Super Vendor). 
Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 45 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    43
Figure 28: Balance assigned to an NFC card displayed on the 
Sempo app. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS
The Sempo app was also used by vendors and Community Focal 
Points to check the balance held on a recipient’s NFC card. The 
UI presented a distraction-free white background with the value 
rendered in VUV approximately centred on both axis, see Figure 28.
In contrast to the vendor experience seen in Figure 26, Oxfam 
staff typically saw all activity across the programme via the 
dashboard, see Figure 29. Much like the app, Sempo’s dashboard 
UI was uncomplicated with all values displayed in VUV.
Confusion among Oxfam staff were limited to the language used 
to describe actions on the platform, especially when viewed in 
relation to the activity recorded on the Ethereum mainnet. No 
significant feedback was recorded in regards to the dashboard 
UI; see section 7.3.1. ‘Platform Transparency’ for user experience 
issues faced by Oxfam staff unrelated to the UI.
7.5.2. Integrations
One of the key features of the Sempo platform is its tight 
integration with KoBoToolbox.17 This open-source suite of tools is 
supported by the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative (HHI), Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital, and Kweyo, among many humanitarian actors. 
It is popular among those collecting field data in challenging 
environments, such as a humanitarian crisis or in developing 
countries. The suite is composed of a form builder that informs the 
way data is collected and a data manager/visualiser. 
Sempo’s KoBoToolbox integration streamlined recipient onboarding 
by taking advantage of existing humanitarian processes. Since 
Oxfam staff in Vanuatu have used KoBoToolbox in past programmes, 
no additional training was required.
17	 More information on KoBoToolbox available at: https://www.kobotoolbox.org/
Figure 29: Oxfam Australia’s view of the Sempo transfer page captured at 
12:55pm on 10/05/2019.

--- Page 46 ---
44    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
8. Recommendations
8.1. Consider the location in project 
planning
While connectivity and stable power were among the selection 
criteria for the UnBlocked Cash pilot and the system was 
designed to withstand some degree of service interruption, 
issues did present with intermittent connectivity in the second 
round. As such, additional consideration may have to be made 
to ensure a high-quality intervention.
Intervening parties may consider creating local networks by 
introducing their own hardware. This might include resilient 
mesh-networks or simple local area networks depending on 
the context. See section 6.7. ‘DLT-based CVA durability in an 
urban context of Vanuatu’ for a more detailed explanation of the 
connectivity issues faced during the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
8.2. Consult communities more 
broadly
8.2.1 Consult at-risk urban communities
Since the UnBlocked Cash pilot was not tested in a disaster 
or other adversely affected area, the needs of the pilot 
participants are anticipated to be quite different from a 
disaster-affected population—noting that building materials 
were the least-purchased items during the UnBlocked Cash 
pilot, see section 6.3. ‘How value is spent’ for a comparison 
of spending patterns between the Ambae volcano emergency 
response and the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
As such, more work should be done to understand the needs of 
at-risk communities to prepare a solution like that offered by 
Sempo for the unique conditions of a post-disaster scenario. 
This might include more extensive comparative studies of 
spending patterns from PDM surveys of disaster-affected 
communities or other anthropological activities.
It is important to note that Pango and Mele Maat were specifically 
selected for their low-risk status, as it is Oxfam’s position that 
solutions should not be ‘tested’ on highly at-risk, vulnerable or 
actively disaster-affected communities. Oxfam believes that since 
Tropical Cyclone Pam heavily impacted both Pango and Mele Maat in 
2015, these communities hold a recent living memory of a disaster 
and are, therefore, well-informed research participants.
8.3. Uniquely identifiable cards
Since all the NFC cards issued to both vendors and recipients 
were visually identical with the exception of a QR code, it 
was common to observe cards accidentally switched during 
a transaction. This was particularly problematic when vendor 
cards, used as identification (ID) for the system, were mistaken 
as recipient cards. The vendor cards could be accidentally 
picked up from a table, and neither party could immediately 
resolve the situation. According to Sempo, there was only one 
instance of a pair of families accidentally switching cards; 
however, at scale, this issue is likely to become more common.
Cards might be differentiated by role, with a different colour 
assigned to Super Vendors, Vendors, and Recipients. Each card 
might also include a noncritical piece of identifiable information 
such as name or initials and gender. Additionally, the cards 
might be emblazoned with an algorithmically generated pattern 
so that no two cards are alike.
8.4. More Super Vendors for post-
disaster scenarios
In a post-disaster scenario, Super Vendors could be used 
to help the local economy recover faster. Typically financial 
institutions take time to recover after an event, the length 
and extent to which depends on whether either or both their 
headquarters and branch network are effected (Hosono et al 
2016, p.17). Beyond the time required to repair physical damage 
to banking infrastructure, lending capacity may be weakened for 
up to three years after an event (Ibid).
The traditional banking system, as well as conventional 
deployments of DLT-based assistance, rely on fragile 
information and communications technology (ICT). While these 
often bounce back quickly under the right conditions and with 
the right support, there is a period where interpersonal and 
organisation trust could allow a system like that tested in 
Vanuatu to operate before aid arrives in the county.
If Super Vendors have an agreement with Oxfam that a certain 
amount of funds will be made available within a specific time of 
the event, Oxfam could issue value to the recipient cards locally, 
and the Super Vendors could begin exchanging their inventory 
with community members on a ‘side-channel’. Once ICTs recover, 
the transaction could sync with the Ethereum mainnet, and the 
Super Vendors could redeem the value from Oxfam or via a digital 
exchange depending on the state of the network. Alternatively, 
Oxfam could replenish the vendor stocks with goods through relief 
channels or invite local wholesalers to participate as vendors, 
thereby enabling smaller vendors to restock more often and 
without having to cash-out in order to do so. In the latter scenario, 
wholesalers could also perform the function of the Super Vendor.
In these scenarios, the recovery solution becomes more 
community-owned, as it is the Super Vendors that are providing 
liquidity during the ICT outage. There may also be other 
community-initiated resilience programmes like time-banks that 
allow participants to accrue value, which could be exchanged 
at an agreed rate for the tokenised value used during the 
emergency response. In the case of Oxfam, hours in the time-
bank could be exchanged for the Sempo CCV and subsequently 
spent at participating vendors.

--- Page 47 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    45
Figure 30: Vendor Sammy Kalmer confirms a transaction on the Sempo app. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 48 ---
46    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
This solution presumes working mobile phones and some means 
by which to charge batteries.
8.4.1. Alternatives to the Super Vendor
In addition to examining the Super Vendor model in different 
contexts, alternatives to the Super Vendor must also be 
explored. Depending on the design of the total system, it could 
be argued that the Super Vendor represents an additional and 
perhaps unnecessary step. Indeed the Super Vendor was not 
tested in Mele Maat in favour of traditional account-to-account 
bank transfers.
8.5. Cashing out via digital exchange
Cashing-out vendors in a timely and cost-effective manner was 
among the most significant challenges of the UnBlocked Cash 
pilot. This was due in large part to the limitations of existing 
FSPs on which Sempo and Oxfam relied. These FSPs imposed 
fees on both sender and receiver in addition to setting minimum 
transfer values, which were higher than what vendors required. 
These conditions lead to the Super Vendor model discussed in 
section 6.2. ‘Hub-and-spoke funds flow’.
Regardless of the Super Vendor, the tested system still 
required that all vendors held a traditional bank account, and 
all major reimbursements were nevertheless made with the 
aid of financial incumbents. As a result of this, the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot did not disintermediate when compared to Oxfam’s 
standard process. Since disintermediation represents potential 
time-efficiencies and cost-savings and is one of the three 
characteristics of DLTs as defined by this report, Oxfam 
considers it an important goal.
One approach to disintermediation is to encourage vendors 
to exchange their DAI for fiat currency through third-party 
exchanges such as Binance, Coinbase, or Kraken. This would 
serve to remove the reliance on incumbent financial institutions. 
In this scenario, there are more actors in the relief chain 
than Oxfam’s standard process, i.e. Sempo and an exchange; 
however, there is no need for Oxfam to handle fiat currency after 
the CCVs are created.
Given the moratorium on the individual use of cryptocurrencies 
in Vanuatu, including the purchase and use of exchanges and 
subsequent unavailability and inaccessibility thereof, this 
solution is not currently possible. However, it is conceivable 
that if systems like that trialed during the UnBlocked Cash pilot 
demonstrated clear advantages at a low risk, then the situation 
in Vanuatu and elsewhere might change.
During the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Sempo was the only 
organisation on its whitelist that controlled which actors 
had access to the DAI and the sale thereof to a third party. 
Theoretically, any party capable of transferring funds 
into Vanuatu to cash-out vendors in compliance with KYC 
regulations could be on the list. Alternatively, vendors who have 
passed KYC checks could be added to the whitelist, which would 
allow the direct sale of DAI on any exchange while meeting 
Sempo’s regulatory obligations.
The second approach to further disintermediate is to develop a 
proprietary DLT-based solution equivalent to that tested. Even in 
a perfect world, Sempo essentially replaces existing FSPs in the 
relief chain; it is, therefore, impossible to truly disintermediate 
unless actors are subtracted from the current solution.
An advantage of this which is unique to Oxfam is the ability for 
confederates to hold one another accountable without ‘external’ 
influence. This consensus mechanism works because each 
confederate has self-interests and is simultaneously obliged to 
cooperate. Additionally, a proprietary system could have significant 
benefits to Oxfam’s internal operations, which might include but is 
not limited to intra-institutional transfers (IITs).
Currently, Sempo is a small start-up testing a development 
phase product. In contrast, Oxfam enjoys global reach, and 
considerable brand recognition—an endorsement from Oxfam is 
likely to carry weight in the sector.
Since DLTs can be made interoperable, especially if data is stored 
publicly, a proprietary solution does not necessarily limit ‘hand 
over’, which is an important function of humanitarian programmes.
8.6. The use of stablecoins
More should be done to understand the benefits of using 
cryptoassets where a simple representation of value would 
suffice. As indicated in section 8.5. ‘Cashing out via digital 
exchange’, there are currently many legal restrictions on the 
direct use of cryptoassets, such the stablecoin DAI, in countries 
like Vanuatu. As a result, the inclusion of such assets increases 
complexity for questionable gains if the solutions described in 
the previous section are not possible.
In the case of the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Oxfam, as a trusted 
entity, could back its own token, which would provide all the 
same reporting efficiencies as the tested system without the 
complexity of the ‘wrapping’ and ‘unwrapping’ of DAI.

--- Page 49 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    47
8.7. App improvements
8.7.1. Super Vendor compatible app
A significant limitation affecting the Super Vendor is the 
inability to see the amount they are owed from performing 
cash-out services. Given the relative success of the Super 
Vendor model, Oxfam recommends that the Sempo app offer 
equivalent information to the dashboard without overwhelming 
the interface.
8.7.2. Donor compatible app
Oxfam’s work with DLTs has been relatively diverse. Among its 
experiments is the Smart Donations app described in section 
3. ‘Background & Context’. This experience creates an obvious 
opportunity to test the extent of the disintermediation promised 
by supporters of DLTs. If funds jumped from the donor directly 
to recipients or a single liquidity partner in-country—which 
might include Oxfam—the system would, by virtue of fewer bank 
transfers, become more cost-effective to maintain. A baseline 
study conducted by OxLabs suggests that the merchant fees 
incurred by Oxfam for low-value-high-volume donations from 
individual donors can incur high overheads when compared with 
high-value-low-volume donations from a back donor such as 
DFAT. As such, extending the functionality of the Sempo app to 
accept individual or back donor payments presents potentially 
dramatic cost savings. See section 8.9.1. ‘Adding additional 
actors’ for more context.
8.8. Digital wallets
8.8.1. Governance of digital wallets in a corporate 
environment
Value on Ethereum’s distributed ledger is assigned to a public 
address, which anyone with the correct key can access. The 
combination of an address or a public key with a private key 
constitutes a digital ‘wallet’.18 
The underlying public-key cryptography, sometimes called 
asymmetric cryptography, is at the heart of the user experience 
of any tokenised exchange on a distributed ledger. This 
technology generates a pair of keys from a randomly generated 
string. One of the keys is public, which can be shared in the 
way a bank account number is disseminated. The other is 
private, which the owner keeps to themselves like a PIN used to 
withdraw funds from that bank account.
Contrary to popular belief, value cannot be ‘lost’ on a distributed 
ledger; since there are many copies of the ledger, there are also 
many copies of the record that a particular address holds a 
certain amount a value. However, one can lose access to value 
if the private key is lost. This makes the management of the 
keypair or wallet critical. The type of wallet dictates how the 
18	 The digital ‘wallet’ serves as a gateway to interact with a DLT. A wallet is to a DLT what a browser (Chrome or Firefox etc.) is to the internet. The ‘wallet’ is the second-
to-last mile in CVA, where the last mile is represented by the off-chain exchange of goods for non-fungible tokens or CCVs in the case of the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
keys are managed and, more recognisably, how one interacts 
with the associated value. The table below provides a summary 
of the different wallet types and some of their properties.
Note: The assessment of security and usability, i.e. speed of 
use and ease of use, above is the author’s opinion and not a 
statement of fact. Additionally, the usability assessment has 
been contextualised to the UnBlocked Cash pilot.
The question for Oxfam and other similar corporate 
environments is who governs the wallet and what processes 
need to be developed for safe and effective use thereof? 
Alternatively, does Oxfam need to govern the wallet at all? 
More work must be done to identify these questions and 
subsequently develop guidelines with respect to their answers.
8.8.2. Digital wallets in developing contexts
In developing contexts where cryptoassets are untested or 
misunderstood, it remains unclear what jurisdiction local 
administrations have or should have over such assets and the 
digital wallets to which they are assigned. During the UnBlocked 
Cash pilot, the NFC cards behaved much like a ‘custodial’ paper 
wallet, which was used to retrieve rather than store value. This 
is in contrast to a ‘non-custodial’ wallet with which the holder 
is personally responsible for the assigned value. In this design, 
there is no risk of value being lost along with the card; however, 
the cardholder must trust the custodian.
This presents the second jurisdictional question: if the NFC card is 
just a right to access a wallet, which is centrally held alongside all 
others in the programme, who is legally responsible?
Type
Category
Example
Security
Speed
Ease
Mobile 
wallets
Software
Bitcoin Wallet, 
TrustWallet etc.
Medium
Medium
Medium
Desktop 
wallets
Software
Bitcoin Core, 
MyEtherWallet 
etc.
Medium
Medium
Low
Browser 
wallets
Software
MetaMask.
Medium
Medium
Low
Web/
Online 
wallets
Software
Coinbase, 
MyCrypto etc.
Low
Medium
Medium
Hardware 
wallets
Hardware
KeepKey, 
Ledger, Trezor 
etc.
High
Low
Low
Paper 
wallets
Physical
Representation 
of an address 
committed to 
paper.
Medium
Low
Low
Smart 
cards
Physical
As issued 
by Sempo; 
functionally 
equivalent to a 
‘paper wallet’.
Medium
High
High
Table 30: Wallet Solutions

--- Page 50 ---
48    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
Figure 31: Catharine Patunvanu, an Oxfam staff member using KoBoToolbox during participant registration in Pango. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 51 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    49
8.9. Scaling-up
Testing the pilot in different contexts and with more donors
With just 187 heads of households and 29 vendors participating 
in the UnBlocked Cash pilot, it remains unclear how the tested 
system is likely to respond at scale or in a different context, 
especially in an emergency response or recovery effort.
Without further testing at a larger scale, it is impossible to 
determine how the Sempo platform or the underlying DLT 
will cope. In 2017, Vitalik Buterin told TechCrunch “Bitcoin is 
processing a bit less than three transactions per second”. 
Ethereum at the time was capable of five transactions per 
second, which Buterin points out is considerably less than the 
12 rides a second Uber provides (Biggs 2017). This illustrates 
one of the many scaling issues DLT-based applications have to 
contend with.
8.9.1. Adding additional actors
A clear scale-up opportunity exists in the inclusion of donors 
to the DLT-based relief chain. This might include traditional 
government back donors like DFAT, corporate donors, or 
individual donors.
Donors could contribute cryptoassets directly or convert fiat 
currency at a digital exchange such as Binance, Coinbase, or 
Kraken into an asset like DAI. The asset could be forwarded directly 
to an NGO like Oxfam or committed to a specific type of intervention 
by way of a ‘Smart Donation’ feature. Such donations could also 
be triggered if donor-defined conditions are met as in the Smart 
Donation app briefly described in section 3. ‘Background & Context’. 
For such functionality, the Sempo app would have to be redesigned 
to accommodate a donor front end as previously described in 
section 8.7.2. ‘Donor compatible app’.
However, it is possible to add additional actors without 
modifications of this nature. By simply assigning a digital wallet 
to each actor in the relief chain, it is possible to test the business 
processes required to accommodate this new technology.
Alternatively, Oxfam might test the implications of using DLTs 
to track its IITs. If it is taken for granted that funds flow back 
and forth between Oxfam confederates constantly, it stands to 
reason that any two confederates in the network may in time 
reach equilibrium. One actor might owe another a payment of 
100,000 dollars. Meanwhile, the other actor owes the first four 
payments of 25,000 dollars. In this scenario, both actors pay 
bank transfer fees for effectively 0 dollars transferred. If a DLT 
was employed to track these IITs, tokens could be sent back 
and forth at no cost. Then at agreed intervals, the two actors 
could settle any outstanding amount in a single transfer, hereby 
reducing direct costs and potentially increasing liquidity as the 
funds are not held hostage by intermediaries for ‘processing’.
8.10. Lifetime research and 
development costs
OxLabs has been working on testing DLT-based CVA, among 
other activities, since March 2018. While this small team only 
dedicates an incredibly small amount of their time to OxLabs, 
this length of time relative to the period of the UnBlocked Cash 
pilot and the small amount of value dispersed, represents a high 
operational overhead. Much of this time was exploratory, as only 
three months past between engaging Sempo and successfully 
delivering the pilot. Nevertheless, this exploratory period 
contributes to the research and development costs of the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot and any others to follow. Additionally, this 
study does not take into consideration the development costs 
incurred by Sempo; it is, therefore, impossible to say what it 
would cost to develop a platform equivalent to that tested. This 
section explores some of the elements that might contribute to 
the costs of future DLT-based CVAs.
8.10.1. Staff training and operational 
considerations
During the UnBlocked Cash pilot, Oxfam observed a clear 
reduction in the time required to onboard participants when 
compared to traditional CVA solutions and between the first and 
second rounds of the pilot. This suggests both an inherently 
more efficient process facilitated by the Sempo platform and a 
possible learning effect, which is typical as staff become more 
familiar with the system.
Staff in Vanuatu reported that they did not have sufficient 
time to familiarise themselves with the Sempo dashboard. This 
suggests that not enough time was spent on staff training or 
that expectations were not properly set for the degree of time 
that would be dedicated to internal capacity building. Due to 
resource limitations, the staff did not log the time spent on 
many of their activities regarding the pilot, see section 8.11. 
‘Addressing research limitations’ for more information. It is, 
therefore, impossible to report how much time each step took 
or how much staff time was dedicated to training. For future 
implementations and for a better understanding of the lifetime 
cost of implementing a system like that tested during the 
UnBlocked Cash pilot, it is essential that more rigorous records 
be kept of staff activities.
To directly address staff concerns regarding their lack of 
familiarity with elements of the platform, it is recommended that 
Oxfam or the service provider develop a clear training process as 
a component of staff onboarding.
8.10.2. Clarify business models
Presently, many of the service providers evaluated by Oxfam, 
including Sempo, are in a start-up or scale-up phase with 
evolving business models. Some like Sempo offer turnkey 
solutions for a fixed price, while others rely on volume-based 
pricing. At the scale of the UnBlocked Cash pilot, the service 
providers’ business model or pricing structure has little impact; 
however, at scale, a volume-based system becomes highly 
uncompetitive compared to Oxfam’s existing arrangements. It is, 
therefore, essential that Oxfam and others in the humanitarian 
sector set clear expectations for start-ups amidst evolving 
business models and offer insight into existing humanitarian 
operations and ways of working.
Furthermore, to establish the true cost of a full-scale 
implementation of a system like that tested during this pilot, 
the business models of both the service provider and the 
humanitarian organisations involved must be clearly defined.

--- Page 52 ---
50    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
8.11. Addressing research limitations
8.11.1. Onsite monitoring disconnected from PDM
Many of the insights that inform the user experience dimension 
of this study were made during onsite monitoring. This is due 
to the potency of the responses of the 120 recipients who were 
asked to “… tell us a bit about your experience with the pilot”.
While insightful, this data was collected without names; it is, 
therefore, impossible to connect the insights from this data set 
with others. For instance, are people who reported struggling 
with the Sempo platform also in the unbanked category and, 
therefore, unfamiliar with representations of value other than 
cash? It is recommended that future data collection asks one 
identifying question to ensure the data sets are interoperable.
8.11.2. More comprehensive baseline studies
To make robust comparisons of new and novel solutions with 
existing ones, it is imperative Oxfam collects baseline data 
with a one-to-one relationship to the tested system. Given the 
speed with which the UnBlocked Cash project was iterated upon, 
the baseline study conducted by Oxlabs for the time and cost 
dimensions of this research became largely irrelevant. As such, 
much of the information used for comparison is either anecdotal or 
extrapolated. It is for this reason that it is impossible to comment 
confidently on many aspects of the time and cost dimensions.
Direct costs, such as transfer fees, should be more 
comprehensively evaluated in relation to the context of future 
activities. In particular, transfers from back donors such as 
DFAT to Oxfam, and subsequent transfers from that pool of 
funds to country offices, should be tracked. This report relies 
on the measurement of bulk transfers from Oxfam’s Australian 
bank accounts to those in Vanuatu as a proxy for the transfers 
described above. The most significant limitation of using 
monthly bulk transfers in place of a transfer made during an 
emergency response is Oxfam’s internal processing time, which 
is slowed by policies enforced by finance departments in both 
Australia and Vanuatu. To arrive at an accurate rendering of 
the time required to transfer funds between the two countries, 
observations must be made during an emergency response or in 
a simulation thereof. Additionally, and more critically, staff time 
must be assigned to well-defined tasks within a programme so 
that operating costs can be confidently calculated.
8.12. Addressing risks
8.12.1 Single point of failure
The Sempo co-founder’s privileged knowledge of the platform 
represents a vulnerability if this system is to scale beyond 
the parameters of the pilot. If the Sempo platform is to be 
implemented as a component of an emergency response, more 
qualified experts or additional staff training should be deployed 
to ensure platform issues can be addressed quickly and safely. 
See section 6.8. ‘The indispensable expert’ for more information.
8.12.2. Privacy breach due to real-time monitoring?
Real-time monitoring of transactions during the UnBlocked Cash 
pilot provided both greater transparency than traditional CVA 
solutions and faster response to participant needs. However, 
this raised issues of privacy, power, and potential risk of 
pseudonymous transaction records available in real-time or 
near real-time.
More work should be done to identify risks associated with this 
system and to understand the potential implications.

--- Page 53 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    51
Figure 32: Pango, Vanuatu: Pango Community member Ruth Nalau registers for the Unblocked Cash Transfer Pilot. Photo: Keith Parsons/OxfamAUS

--- Page 54 ---
52    UNBLOCKED CASH: PILOTING ACCELERATED CASH TRANSFER DELIVERY IN VANUATU
9. References
1.	 Australian Red Cross (2018) Harnessing the Transformational Power of Technology for Good. 10.
2.	 Beamon BM and Balcik B (2008) Performance measurement in humanitarian relief chains. International Journal of Public Sector 
Management 21(1): 4–25. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/09513550810846087 (accessed 17/07/19).
3.	 Biggs J (2017) Ethereum will match Visa in scale in a ‘couple of years’ says founder. TechCrunch. Available at: 
http://social.techcrunch.com/2017/09/18/ethereum-will-replace-visa-in-a-couple-of-years-says-founder/ (accessed 22/08/19).
4.	 The Cash Learning Partnership (CaLP) (n.d.) Overview. Available at: http://www.cashlearning.org/overview/what-we-do-overview 
(accessed 10/07/19).
5.	 The Cash Learning Partnership (CaLP) (n.d.) CVA Glossary. Available at: http://www.cashlearning.org/resources/glossary 
(accessed 10/07/19).
6.	 Coppi G and Fast L (2019) Blockchain and distributed ledger technologies in the humanitarian sector. 46.
7.	 Davis J (2011) The Crypto-Currency. Available at: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2011/10/10/the-crypto-currency 
(accessed 17/07/19).
8.	 Emergency Telecommunications Cluster (ETC) (n.d.) Voice and Data Connectivity. Available at: https://www.etcluster.org/
services/voice-and-data-connectivity (accessed 31/08/19).
9.	 Ethereum (n.d.) ethereum.org. Available at: https://ethereum.org (accessed 13/07/19).
10.	Ethereum (2019) The Ethereum Wiki. Available at: https://github.com/ethereum/wiki (accessed 14/07/19).
11.	Evans DK and Popova A (2014) Cash Transfers and Temptation Goods: A Review of Global Evidence. 36.
12.	Francis L, Hancke G, Mayes K and Markantonakis K (n.d.) Practical Relay Attack on Contactless Transactions by Using NFC Mobile 
Phones. 16.
13. Galen D (2018) Blockchain for Social Impact: Moving Beyond the Hype. Stanford Graduate School of Business.
14.	GiveWell (2012) Cash Transfers. Available at: https://www.givewell.org/international/technical/programs/cash-transfers 
(accessed 11/07/19).
15.	Harvey P and Bailey S (2015) Cash transfer programming and the humanitarian system. 6.
16.	Holt C and Hart S (2019) Vanuatu Cash Transfer Feasibility Assessment. Oxfam.
17.	Hosono K, Miyakawa D, Uchino T, Hazama M, Ono A, Uchida H and Uesugi I (2016) Natural Disasters, Damage to Banks, and Firm 
Investment: Natural Disaster and Firm Investment. International Economic Review 57(4): 1335–1370.
18.	MakerDAO (n.d.) White Paper. Available at: https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper/ (accessed 14/07/19).
19.	Mercy Corps (n.d.) Cash Transfer Programming Toolkit.
20.	Metcalfe-Hough V, Fenton W and Poole L (2019) Grand Bargain annual independent report 2019. 100.
21.	Heintze H-J, Kirch L, Küppers B, Mann H, Mischo F, Mucke P, Pazdzierny T, Prütz R, Radtke K, Strube F and Weller D (2018) 
WorldRiskReport 2018. Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft and Ruhr University Bochum – Institute for International Law of Peace and Armed 
Conflict (IFHV).
22.	Myler L (2017) Transparent Transactions: How Blockchain Payments Can Make Life Easier For B2B Companies. Forbes. Available at: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/larrymyler/2017/11/09/transparent-transactions-how-blockchain-payments-can-make-life-
easier-for-b2b-companies (accessed 15/07/19).
23.	NFC Forum (n.d.) About the Technology. Available at: https://nfc-forum.org/what-is-nfc/about-the-technology/ (accessed 
12/07/19).
24.	Norman D and Nielsen J (n.d.) The Definition of User Experience (UX). Nielsen Norman Group. Available at: https://www.nngroup.
com/articles/definition-user-experience (accessed 17/07/19).
25.	OCHA (n.d.) Cash transfer programming. Available at: https://www.unocha.org/philippines/cash-transfer-programming 
(accessed 11/07/19).
26.	Ortiz CE (2008) An Introduction to Near-Field Communication and the Contactless Communication API. Available at: 
https://www.oracle.com/technetwork/articles/javame/nfc-140183.html (accessed 12/07/19).
27.	Overseas Development Institute (ODI) and Center for Global Development (CDG) (2015) Doing Cash Differently - How cash transfers 
can transform humanitarian aid.
28.	OxChain (n.d.) Programmable Donations. Available at: https://oxchain.uk/smart-donations-app/ (accessed 01/09/19).
29.	Oxfam (2015) Cash transfer programming: can Oxfam stay ahead of the game? Oxfam Views & Voices. Available at: 
https://views-voices.oxfam.org.uk/2015/04/oxfams-cash-work/ (accessed 12/07/19).

--- Page 55 ---
RESEARCH REPORT OCTOBER 2019    53
30.	Oxfam (2019) Cash Transfers for Rapid Livelihoods Recovery of Volcano-Displaced Families in Vanuatu, Sanma Province.
31.	Oxfam in Cambodia (2019) BlockChain For Livelihoods From Organic Cambodian Rice (BlocRice) Project. Available at: 
https://cambodia.oxfam.org/BlocRice (accessed 01/09/19).
32.	Oxfam in Vanuatu (2017) Terms of Reference for the Cash Transfer Feasibility Study.
33.	Reedy C (2017) Blockchain Is Helping Us Feed the World’s Hungriest Families. Futurism. Available at: https://futurism.com/
blockchain-is-helping-us-feed-the-worlds-hungriest-families (accessed 15/07/19).
34.	Rawlings GE (1999) Foundations of Urbanisation: Port Vila Town and Pango Village, Vanuatu. Oceania 70(1): 72–86.
35.	Berentsen A and Schär F (2019) Stablecoins: The quest for a low-volatility cryptocurrency.
36.	Smith G (2018) The State of the World’s Cash Report: Cash Transfer Programming in Humanitarian Aid.
37.	Tapscott D (2016) How the blockchain is changing money and business. TEDSummit. Available at: https://www.ted.com/talks/
don_tapscott_how_the_blockchain_is_changing_money_and_business (accessed 17/07/19).
38.	The Logistics Cluster (n.d.) Digital Logistics Capacity Assessments. Available at: https://dlca.logcluster.org/display/public/
DLCA/Vanuatu (accessed 21/08/19).
39.	The World Bank (2018) Financial Inclusion on the Rise, But Gaps Remain, Global Findex Database Shows. World Bank. Available 
at: https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2018/04/19/financial-inclusion-on-the-rise-but-gaps-remain-global-
findex-database-shows (accessed 13/08/19).
40.	Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) (2009) National Population and Housing Census.
41.	Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) (2010) Household Income and Expenditure Survey.
42.	Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) and UNDP Pacific Centre (2010) Vanuatu Hardship & Poverty Report.
43.	Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) (2016) Mini - Census Report.
44.	World Food Programme (WFP) (2015) WFP Emergency Operation: Vanuatu 200833 - Emergency Food Assistance to Victims of 
Cyclone Pam. Available at: https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/wfp274152.pdf (accessed 04/11/19).

--- Page 56 ---
